---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-23
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## The derived category 

**Definition**. The _derived category_ of an abelian category $\mathcal A$ is a category, 
denoted $D(\mathcal A)$, with a functor 
$$
    Q : Ch(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal A)
$$
which takes quasi-isomorphisms to isomorphisms and such that for any 
$F : Ch(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal C$ which also inverts quasi-isomorphisms 
there exists a unique (up to isomorphism) $\overline{F}: D(\mathcal A) 
\to \mathcal C$ such that 
{% eqn der_cat_univ %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    Ch(\mathcal A) \ar[dd,"Q"] \ar[dr,"F"] & \\
    & \mathcal C \\
    D(\mathcal A) \ar[ur,"\overline{F}"] & 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes up to natural isomorphism. 

There are of course versions $D^\ast(\mathcal A)$ for $\ast \in \lbrace b, -, + \rbrace$. 

Suppressing set-theoretic concerns, $D(\mathcal A)$ always exists. 

**Definition**. A class of arrows $\mathcal O$ is called a (left) _Ore system_ if 
- $\mathcal O$ is closed under composition
- For $f: X \to Z$ in $\mathcal O$ and $X \to Y$, one can complete the diagram 
{% eqn ore_square %}
\begin{tikzcd} 
    X \ar[r] \ar[d,"f"] & Y \ar[d,"g",dashed] \\
    Z \ar[r,dashed] & U 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
with $g$ in $\mathcal O$.
- If $\alpha f = 0$ with $f$ in $\mathcal O$, then there is $g$ from $\mathcal O$ 
with $g \alpha = 0$. 

There is also a right Ore system where we reverse arrows. 

**Theorem**. Quasi-isomorphisms form both a left and right Ore system. Consequently, 
the localization of $Ch(\mathcal A)$ exists. 

Haiman has some [nice notes](https://math.berkeley.edu/~mhaiman/math256-fall13-spring14/cohomology-1_derived-cat.pdf) 
from his derived categories course that cover this. 

While existence is nice, to get a handle on the derived category, you need to be able 
to actually compute morphism spaces. 

**Definition**. We let K${}^\ast$-Proj/Inj be the full subcategory of K-Proj/Inj consisting of those complexes 
with {bounded, bounded above, bounded below} homology for $\ast \in \lbrace b, -, + \rbrace$.

**Theorem**. Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough projectives. Then 
$$
    D^b(\mathcal A) \cong K^b{\text -}Proj 
$$
and 
$$
    D^-(\mathcal A) \cong K^-{\text -}Proj.
$$
If, furthermore, $\mathcal A$ has countable coproducts, then 
$$
    D(\mathcal A) \cong K{\text -}Proj. 
$$

Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives. Then 
$$
    D^b(\mathcal A) \cong K^b{\text -}Inj 
$$
and 
$$
    D^+(\mathcal A) \cong K^-{\text -}Inj.
$$
If, furthermore, $\mathcal A$ has countable products, then 
$$
    D(\mathcal A) \cong K{\text -}Inj. 
$$

The first part of constructing $Q$ is to take the quotient map 
$$
    \pi : Ch(\mathcal A) \to K(\mathcal A)
$$
Then for each complex we choose a K-projective resolution 
$$
    r_A : P_A \to A
$$
Let $f : A \to B$ be a morphism. Complete $r_B : P_B \to B$ to 
a triangle  
$$
    P_B \to B \to C \to P_B[1]
$$
be it completed to a triangle. Applying $\operatorname{Hom}(P_A,-)$ 
yields an exact sequence 
$$
    \cdots \to \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,C[-1]) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,P_B) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,B) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,C) \to \cdots 
$$
where 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,C[-1]) & = 0 \\
        \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,C) & = 0 
    \end{aligned}
$$
Thus, 
$$
    r_B \circ - : \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,P_B) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P_A,B)
$$
is an isomorphism in the homotopy category. So there exists a unique 
$$
    \tilde{f} : P_A \to P_B
$$
completing 
{% eqn lift_res_map %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    P_A \ar[r,"\tilde{f}"] \ar[d,"r_A"] & P_B \ar[d,"r_B"] \\
    A \ar[r,"f"] & B
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}

Given this, we see that 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        K(\mathcal A) & \to D(\mathcal A) \\
        A & \mapsto P_A \\
        f & \mapsto \tilde{f}
    \end{aligned}
$$
is a well-defined functor. 

**Lemma**. If $f$ is a quasi-isomorphism, then $\tilde{f}$ is an 
isomorphism of chain complexes up to homotopy. 

{% proof %}
Assume for the moment that $\tilde{f}$ is a quasi-isomorphism. Then we have 
an exact sequence 
$$
    \cdots \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,C[-1]) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,P_A) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,P_B) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,C) \to \cdots 
$$
where $C$ is the cone over $\tilde{f} : P_A \to P_B$. Since $C$ is acyclic and 
$P$ is K-projective, the map 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P,P_A) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,P_B)
$$
is an isomorphism for all $P$. Thus, so is $\tilde{f} : P_A \to P_B$. 

Now if $f$ is a quasi-isomorphism and $r_B \tilde{f} = f r_A$ with $r_A,r_B$ 
also quasi-isomorphisms, then 
$$
    H^i(\tilde{f}) = H^i(r_B)^{-1} H^i(f) H^i(r_A)
$$
is also an isomorphism for all $i$. 
{% endproof %}

Thus $Q : Ch(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal A)$, given by the composition of 
the two functors, takes quasi-isomorphism to isomorphisms. 

Finally, we can check that $Q : Ch(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal A)$ satisfies 
the universal property. 

Given $F: Ch(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal C$ that takes quasi-isomorphisms to 
isomorphisms, it descends to $K(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal C$. We can restrict 
it to the subcategory K-Proj to get 
$$
    \overline{F} : \text{K-Proj} \to \mathcal C
$$
And 
$$
    \overline{F}Q (A) = F(P_A) \overset{F(r_A)}{\to} F(A)
$$
is a natural isomorphism. 

Thus, whenever we can find a K-projective resolution $P_A \to A$ for all 
$A$ in $Ch^\ast(\mathcal A)$, we can use the full subcategory of the homotopy category 
consisting of those K-projectives
quasi-isomorphic to a complex from $Ch^\ast(\mathcal A)$ as a model for the 
derived category. The case of K-injectives works completely analogously. 

## Computing morphisms

As we saw above, 

**Lemma**. Given complexes $A$ and $B$ and K-projective resolutions $P\_A \to A$ 
and $P_B \to B$, then natural map 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P_A,P_B) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P_A,B)
$$
is an isomorphism. Thus, there is a natural isomorphism 
$$  
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal A)}(A,B) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P_A,B)
$$

Similarly, given a K-injective resolution $B \to I\_B$, we have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal A)}(A,B) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(A,I_B).
$$

The upshot of this observation is that \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P_A,B)$$ or 
$$\operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(A,I_B)$$ is much easier to compute than the morphisms in 
the Ore-localized category. 

The main part of the work is finding a resolution that is amenable to computation. While this 
is definitely still a very serious task in general, it is managable in many examples. 

**Example**. Let $S$ be a commutative ring and $f_1,\ldots,f_c \in S$. Then _Koszul complex_ 
on $f_1,\ldots,f_c$ is the complex $K(f_1,\ldots,f_c)$ with 
$$
    K(f_1,\ldots,f_c)^j := \bigwedge^j S^{\oplus c}
$$
and whose differential is given by contraction $\iota_{\phi_f}$ with 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \phi_f : S^{\oplus c} & \to S \\
        e_i & \mapsto f_i
    \end{aligned}
$$
for the standard basis $e_i$ of $S^{\oplus c}$. 

In general, we get a map $K(f_1,\ldots,f_c) \to S/(f_1,\ldots,f_c)$ but it not a resolution. 

Let's look at a special case where we can check by hand that it is. Take 
$S = k[x_1,\ldots,x_n]$ with $k$ a field of characteristic zero and 
$f_1,\ldots,f_n = x_1,\ldots,x_n$. 

We can show that $\rho : K(x_1,\ldots,x_n) \to k$ is a quasi-isomorphism. First note that we can split 
the map $\ell : k \to K(x_1,\ldots,x_n)$ but only as a $k$-module. Then the homotopy
$$
    h = \sum_i \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i} e_i \wedge - 
$$
shows that $\ell \circ \rho$ is homotopic to the identity. 
