---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-21
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Half blind to acyclicity 

The following definition comes from 
[Spaltenstein](http://www.numdam.org/item/CM_1988__65_2_121_0/) though he attributes it to Bernstein. 

**Definition**. A complex $P$ is called _K-projective_ if 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,A) = 0
$$
for any acyclic complex $A$. Let K-Proj be the full subcategory 
of $K(\mathcal A)$ consisting of K-projective objects. 

A complex $I$ is called _K-injective_ if 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(A,I) = 0
$$
for any acyclic complex $A$.Let K-Inj be the full subcategory 
of $K(\mathcal A)$ consisting of K-injective objects. 

A simple but very useful observation is the following. 

**Proposition**. If $P$ is K-projective and $\phi: A \to B$ is a 
quasi-isomorphism, then 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,\phi) : \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,A) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,B)
$$
is an isomorphism. 

Similarly, if $I$ is K-injective, then $\operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(\phi,I)$ is 
an isomorphism. 

{% proof %}
We have an exact sequence 
$$
    \cdots \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,CC(\phi)[-1]) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,A) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,B) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,CC(\phi)[-1]) \to \cdots
$$
with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,C(\phi)[-1]) = \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,CC(\phi)) = 0
$$
since $C(\phi)$ is acyclic. The case for $I$ is completely analogous. 
{% endproof %}


**Definition**. A full subcategory $\mathcal S$ of a triangulated $\mathcal T$ is a 
_triangulated subcategory_ if 
- Given any object $S$ of $\mathcal S$, $S[1]$ and $S[-1]$ are also objects of $\mathcal S$. 
- Given any map $f : S \to S^\prime$, then the cone over $f$ is also an object of $S$. 

**Lemma**. Both K-Proj and K-Inj are triangulated subcategories. 

{% proof %}
We have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P[i],A) = \operatorname{Hom}(P,A[-i]) = 0
$$
since $A[-i]$ is also acyclic if $A$ is. Given a map $P \to Q$, we complete it to a triangle 
$$
    P \to Q \to C \to P[1]
$$
and apply $\operatorname{Hom}(-,A)$ to get a exact sequence 
$$
    \cdots \leftarrow \operatorname{Hom}(Q,A) \leftarrow \operatorname{Hom}(C,A) 
    \leftarrow \operatorname{Hom}(P[1],A) \leftarrow \cdots 
$$
with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(Q,A) = \operatorname{Hom}(P[1],A) = 0.
$$
So 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(C,A) = 0. 
$$
The argument for K-Inj is entirely analogous. We will handle closure under finite direct sums 
below.
{% endproof %}

Moreover, each is closed under larger operations. 

**Lemma**. K-Proj is closed under coproducts. K-Inj is closed under products. 

{% proof %}
For coproducts take in $K(\mathcal A)$ this clear:
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(\bigoplus P_i, A) \cong \prod \opertorname{Hom}(P_i,A)
$$
It is straightforward to check that coproducts in $Ch(\mathal A)$ are also 
coproducts in $K(\mathcal A)$. 

K-Inj works similarly. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma** Both K-Proj and K-Inj are closed under retracts. 

{% proof %}
Given a retract $Q \to P \to Q$, we have a retract 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(Q,A) \to \operatorname{Hom}(P,A) \to \operatorname{Hom}(Q,A)
$$
of $0$ for acyclic $A$ and similarly for K-Inj. 
{% endproof %}


We can construct some K-projective/K-injective objects. 

**Lemma**. An object $P$ of $\mathcal A$ is projective if and only if $P[0]$ is 
K-projective. 

An object $I$ of $\mathcal A$ is injective if and only if $I[0]$ is K-injective. 

{% proof %}
We treat the case of $P$. Note that a chain map 
{% eqn proj_k-proj %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    \cdots \ar[r] & 0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & P \ar[r] \ar[d] & 0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & \cdots \\
    \cdots \ar[r] & A^{i-1} \ar[r] & A^i \ar[r] & A^{i+1} \ar[r] & \cdots 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
is equivalent to a map $P \to \ker \delta_A^i$. If $H^i(A) = 0$, then lifting over 
$$
    A^{i-1} \twoheadrightarrow \ker \delta_A^i 
$$
is equivalent to constructing a homotopy of our original map. 
{% endproof %}

We can now build out bounded complexes. But first we want to recall two different ways 
to truncate complexes. 

**Definition**. The _stupid truncations_ of $C$ are given by 
$$
    (\sigma_{\leq i} C)^j = \begin{cases} C^j & j \leq i \\ 0 &  j > i \end{cases}  
$$
and 
$$
    (\sigma_{\geq i} C)^j = \begin{cases} C^j & j \geq i \\ 0 &  j < i \end{cases}  
$$

The other truncations (not really smart but less dumb) are 
$$
    (\tau_{\leq i} C)^j = \begin{cases} C^j & j < i \\ \operatorname{ker} \delta_C^i & j = i \\ 0 &  j > i \end{cases}  
$$
and 
$$
    (\tau_{\geq i} C)^j = \begin{cases} C^j & j > i \\ \operatorname{cok} \delta_C^{i-1} & j = i \\ 0 &  j < i \end{cases}  
$$

**Corollary**. Any bounded complex of projectives is K-projective. Any bounded complex of injectives 
is K-injective. 

{% proof %}
We proceed by induction on the length of the complex. The case of length is covered above. We have 
an isomorphism 
$$
    \sigma_{\leq i} P = C(P^i[i+1] \to \sigma_{\leq i+1} P)
$$
for the morphism 
{% eqn kink_complex %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    P^i \ar[r] \ar[d] & 0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & \cdots \\
    P^{i+1} \ar[r] & P^{i+2} \ar[r] & \cdots 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
given by kinking $\sigma_{\geq i} P$. Using the fact that K-Proj is closed under cones and shifts, we know that 
$\sigma_{\geq i} P$ is K-projective is $P$ is projective and $\sigma_{\geq i+1} P$ are. 

As always, the argument for K-injectives is similar. 
{% endproof %}

We can got a bit further in each direction separately. 

**Lemma**. A bounded above complex of projectives is K-projective. A bounded below complex of injectives is 
K-injective. 

{% proof %}
Given a bounded below complex of projectives $P$, the complex $P$ is the colimit over its truncations
$$
    \sigma{\geq i} P \to \sigma{\geq i-1} P 
$$
If acyclicity were closed under limits, we would be done quickly. However, this is not the case in general. 

We do have a quasi-isomorphism 
$$
    C \left( \bigoplus \sigma_{\geq i} P \to \bigoplus \sigma_{\geq i} P \right) \to P
$$
and as part of homework you will check directly that any quasi-isomorphism between bounded above complexes 
of projectives is invertible up to homotopy. 

Injectives are handled similarly. 
{% endproof %}

You might hope that we can remove the one-sided boundedness conditions that remain. That is not the case. 

**Example**. Let $R = k[x]/(x^2)$. Then the infinite complex 
$$
    P := \cdots \overset{x}{\to} R \overset{x}{\to} R \overset{x}{\to} \cdots
$$
is _not_ K-projective. 

If it were, since it is acyclic, it would have to be null-homotopic. In particular, for any other additive
functor $F: \operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Ab}$, $F(P)$ would be acyclic. 

But applying $- \otimes_R k$ yields 
$$
    \cdots \overset{0}{\to} k \overset{0}{\to} k \overset{0}{\to} \cdots
$$
which is not acyclic. 

It is useful to note that any null-homotopic complex is both K-projective and K-injective so K-projectives 
do not need to have projective components. 

Even with the difficulties, we can translate having enough projectives/injectives into K-projective/K-injective 
resolutions. 

**Proposition**. If $\mathcal A$ has enough projectives, then for all $C \in Ch^-(\mathcal A)$ there 
exists a bounded below complex of projectives $P$ and a quasi-isomorphism 
$$
    \phi: P \to C 
$$

Similarly, $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives, then for all $C \in Ch^+(\mathcal A)$ there 
exists a bounded above complex of injectives $I$ and a quasi-isomorphism 
$$
    \phi: C \to I
$$

{% proof %}
Via induction we can reduce to assuming that we have a commutative diagram 
{% eqn proj_res %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    \cdots \ar[r] & 0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & P^i \ar[r,"\phi^i"] \ar[d] & P^{i+1} \ar[r,"\phi^{i+1}"] \ar[d] & \cdots \\
    \cdots \ar[r] & C^{i-1} \ar[r] & C^i \ar[r] & C^{i+1} \ar[r] & \cdots  
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
such that 
$$
    H^j(\phi) : H^j(P) \to H^i(C) 
$$
is an isomorphism for $j > i$ and a surjection for $j = i$. The goal is extending $P$ and $\phi$ to $P^{i-1}$ and 
$\phi^{i-1}$ so that $H^j(\phi)$ is an isomorphism for $j \geq i$ and a surjection for $j = i-1$. 

Choose a $P_1 \twoheadrightarrow \ker H^i(\phi) \subset P^i$. Let $d : P_1 \to P^i$ denote the composition.

Note $P_1 \to \operatorname{im} \delta_C^{i-1}$. So we can lift
{% eqn proj_lift %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    & P_1 \ar[dl,dashed] \ar[d]\\
    C^{i-1} \ar[r] & \operatorname{im} \delta_C^{i-1} 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
To get $\phi^{i-1} : P_1 \to C^{i-1}$

Now take a $P_2 \twoheadrightarrow H^{i-1}(C)$ which we can lift 
{% eqn proj_lift2 %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    & P_2 \ar[dl,dashed] \ar[d] \\
    \ker \delta_C^{i-1} \ar[r] & H^{i-1}(C) 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
which gives a map $P_2 \to C^{i-1}$. 

Finally set $P^{i-1} = P_1 \oplus P_2$ and $\delta^{i-1}_P = 0 \oplus d$ and let 
$\phi^{i-1}$ be the induced map $P^{i-1} \to C^{i-1}$.

From the choice of $P_1$, we know that $H^i(\phi)$ is an isomorphism and from the choice of $P_2$ we 
know that $H^{i-1}(\phi)$ is surjective.

You can guess how injectives are handled by now. 
{% endproof %}

We say that K-projective $P$ with a quasi-isomorphism 
$$
    P \to C
$$
is a _resolution_ of $C$ and similarly for K-injective. 

Next we treat resolutions of unbounded complexes. 

**Proposition**. Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough projectives and countable coproducts. Then, 
any $C \in Ch(\mathcal A)$ has a K-projective resolution. 

Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives and countable products. Then any $C$ has a 
K-injective resolution. 

{% proof %}
The complex $C$ is the colimit of the (not dumb) truncations 
$$
    \tau_{\leq i} C \to \tau_{\leq i + 1} C
$$
We can choose resolutions $P_i \to \tau_{\geq i C}$. Since the cone over $P_{i+1} \to \tau_{\leq i+1} C$ is 
acyclic, we can lift $P_i \to \tau_{\leq i} C \to \tau_{\leq i+1} C$ to $P_i \to P_{i+1}$. 

Now take the cone $C\left(\bigoplus P_i \to \bigoplus P_i \right)$. This is quasi-isomorphic to the cone 
$C\left(\bigoplus \tau_{\geq i} C \to \bigoplus \tau_{\geq i}C  \right)$ which is quasi-isomorphic to $C$ 
since 
$$
    0 \to \bigoplus \tau_{\geq i} C \to \bigoplus \tau_{\geq i} C \to C \to 0
$$
is exact. 

The case of K-injective resolutions is handled analogously. 
{% endproof %}