---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-05
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Compact objects

An important part of [establishing Morita equivalence]({% link notes/2021_09_30.md %}) 
between $R$ and $M_n(R)$ was that fact that the natural map
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}(U, N_i) \to \operatorname{Hom}(U, 
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i)
$$
was an isomorphism. 

This is equivalent to saying we can factor any $f: U \to \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i$ 
as 
{% eqn cpt_factor %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    U \ar[r] \ar[rd] & \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i \\
    & \bigoplus_{i \in I_f} N_i \ar[u]
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
where $|I_f| < \infty$. 

Objects with the property are very useful. They go be different names depending on the 
context. We will be focused on triangulated categories. 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal T$ be a triangulated category. An object $X$ is called 
_compact_ if the natural map 
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}(X,Y_i) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}(X, \bigoplus_{i \in I} Y_i)
$$
is isomorphism for any $Y_i, i \in I$. 

The full subcategory of compact objects in $\mathcal T$ is denoted by $\mathcal T^c$. 

**Lemma**. $\mathcal T^c$ is triangulated and closed under retracts. 

{% proof %}
We have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(X[n], \bigoplus Y_i) \cong \operatorname{Hom}(X, \bigoplus Y_i[n])
$$
so $X[n] \in \mathcal T^c$ for any $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

Next, take a map $X \to X^\prime$ of compact objects and complete it to a triangle 
$$
    X \to X^\prime \to C \to X[1]
$$
We get a commutative diagram 
{% eqn cpt_triang %}
\begin{tikzcd}
\cdots \ar[r] & \bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(C,Y_i) \ar[r] \ar[d] & 
\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(X^\prime ,Y_i) \ar[r] \ar[d] & 
\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(X,Y_i) \ar[r] \ar[d] & \cdots \\
\cdots \ar[r] & \operatorname{Hom}(C,\bigoplus  Y_i) \ar[r]  & 
\operatorname{Hom}(X^\prime , \bigoplus Y_i) \ar[r]  & 
\operatorname{Hom}(X,\bigoplus  Y_i) \ar[r]  & \cdots 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
with exact rows and where two out of the three vertical maps are isomorphisms. Thus, 
the third is also. 

Finally, if $X^\prime$ is a retract of $X$, the map 
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}(X^\prime,Y_i) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}(X^\prime, \bigoplus_{i \in I} Y_i)
$$
is a retract of an isomorphism. Hence it is an isomorphism. 
{% endproof %}

**Definition**. We say $\mathcal T$ is _compactly generated_ if it has 
small coproducts and there exists a 
set of compact objects $\mathcal C$ such that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(C,Y) = 0 \ \forall C \in \mathcal C
$$
implies $Y = 0$. The set $\mathcal C$ is called a set of _compact generators_. 

**Lemma**. A map $X \to Y$ in $\mathcal T$ with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(C,X) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,Y) 
$$
an isomorphism for all $C$ in a set of compact generators is 
an isomorphism. 

{% proof %}
The map $X \to Y$ is an isomorphism if and only if $\operatorname{cone}(X \to Y) = 0$. 

Since we have a set of compact generators, we only need to check that 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{cone}(X \to Y)) = 0
$$
for all $C$. But this is equivalent to the map 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(C,X) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,Y) 
$$
being an isomorphism for all $C$. 
{% endproof %}

**Example**. $D(R)$ is compactly generated. Indeed, 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(R)}(R[n],Y) \cong H^{-n}Y
$$
If all of these are $0$, then $Y$ is acyclic and hence $0$ in $D(R)$. 

**Definition**. Given a sequence of composable maps 
$$
    X_0 \overset{f_0}{\to} X_1 \overset{f_1}{\to} X_2 \overset{f_2}{\to} \cdots 
$$
the _homotopy colimit_ is the cone over the morphism $\bigoplus X_i \to \bigoplus X_i$ 
induced by the maps 
$$
    X_i \overset{1,-f_i}{\to} X_i \oplus X_{i+1}
$$

**Lemma**. If $C$ is compact, then the natural map 
$$
    \operatorname{colim} \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_\bullet) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet)
$$
is an isomorphism. 

{% proof %}
We have a commutative diagram 
{% eqn colim_hocolim %}
\begin{tikzcd}
\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_i) \ar[r] \ar[d] & \bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_i) \ar[r] \ar[d] & 
\operatorname{colim}\operatorname{Hom}(C,X_\bullet) \ar[d] \\
 \operatorname{Hom}(C,  \bigoplus X_i) \ar[r] & \operatorname{Hom}(C, \bigoplus X_i) \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet)
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
where the left two vertical maps are isomorphisms and the rows are exact. Since the map 
$$
\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_i)  \to \bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_i) 
$$
is injective we see that we have a short exact sequence 
$$
0 \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,  \bigoplus X_i) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C, \bigoplus X_i) \to
\operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet) \to 0
$$
also. Thus, the map 
$$
    \operatorname{colim}\operatorname{Hom}(C,X_\bullet) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet)
$$
is also an isomorphism. 
{% endproof %}

**Proposition**. If $\mathcal C$ is a compact set of generators, then the smallest 
subcategory of $\mathcal T$ that 
- is closed under $\bigoplus$'s
- is triangulated and 
- contains $\mathcal C$ 

is $\mathcal T$ itself. 

{% proof %}
Let 
$$
    U_0 := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} \operatorname{Hom}(C,X)
$$
Set 
$$
    X_0 := \bigoplus_{(C,f) \in U_0} C 
$$
This comes with a natural evaluation map 
$$
    X_0 \to X. 
$$

We work not by induction having constructed $\nu_i : X_i \to X$. We let 
$$
    U_i := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} \lbrace f : C \to X_i \mid \nu_i f = 0 \rbrace
$$
Let 
$$
    K_i := \bigoplus_{(C,f) \in U_i} C 
$$
and set $X_{i+1} = \operatorname{cone}(K_i \to X_i)$. The composition $K_i \to X_i \to X$ 
is $0$ so there exists a $X_{i+1} \to X$ 
{% eqn res_stepi %}
\begin{tikzcd}
K_i \ar[rd,"0"] \ar[r] & X_i \ar[r] \ar[d] & X_{i+1} \ar[ld,dashed] \\
& X & 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
We let $X = \operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet$.

Using the above lemma, it suffices to check that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(C,\operatorname{hocolim}X_\bullet) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,X) 
$$
is any isomorphism for any $C \in \mathcal C$. 

From the other lemma, this is the the same as 
$$
    \operatorname{colim}\operatorname{Hom}(C,X_\bullet) \to \operatorname{Hom}(C,X) 
$$
being an isomorphism. Any element of the colimit is represented by some 
$f: C \to X_i$. If $\nu f : C \to X$ is $0$, then $f \in U_i$ be definition and, 
in fact, $f = 0$ in the colimit. Given any $g: C \to X$, then $g \in U_0$. 
So there is some $C \to X_0$ whose composition with $X_0 \to X$ is $g$. 
Thus, we have an isomorphism. 
{% endproof %}

If we have a compact generating set $\mathcal C$, we can also use it 
characterize _all_ compact objects in $\mathcal T$. The following is 
due to [Neeman](http://www.numdam.org/item/10.24033/asens.1659.pdf).

**Proposition**. Let $\mathcal C$ be a set of compact generators for 
$\mathcal T$. The smallest triangulated subcategory of $\mathcal T$
- containing $\mathcal C$ and 
- closed under retracts 

is $\mathcal T^c$. 

{% proof %}
Pick some $X \in \mathcal T^c$. From the proof the proposition, we know that 
$$
    X \cong \operatorname{hocolim} X_\bullet
$$
where each $X_i$ is obtained as a cone over a map $K_{i-1} \to X_{i-1}$ 
with $K_{i-1}$ a sum of elements of $\mathcal C$. 

We also know that 
$$
    1_X \in \operatorname{Hom}(X,X) \cong \operatorname{colim}\operatorname{Hom}(X,X_i)
$$
Thus, there exists $X \to X_i$ such that 
{% eqn retract %}
\begin{tikzcd}
X \ar[r,"1"] \ar[rd,dashed] & X \\
& X_i \ar[u] 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
So $X$ is a retract of $X_i$. The composition $X \to X_i \to K_{i-1}[1]$ factors through 
a finite summand of $K_{i-1}$. Denote that by $K_{i-1}^\prime$ and let $X^\prime_{i-1}[1]$ 
be the cone over $X \to K_{i-1}^\prime[1]$. 

Now repeat the procedure to produce 
{% eqn resolve %}
\begin{tikzcd}
X^\prime_{-1} \ar[r] \ar[d] & X^\prime_0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & X^\prime_1 \ar[r] \ar[d] 
& \cdots \ar[r] & X_{i-1}^\prime \ar[r] \ar[d] & X \ar[d] \\
0 \ar[r] &X_0 \ar[r] & X_1 \ar[r] & \cdots \ar[r] & X_{i-1} \ar[r] & X_i
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
From repeated applications of the octahedral axiom, the cone of the map 
$X^\prime_l \to X$ is sequence of cones over the cones of 
$X^\prime_{j-1} \to X^\prime_j$. Each of these cones is a finite sum 
of objects from $\mathcal C$ by construction. 
Thus the cone over $X_l \to X$ for any $l$ lies in the smallest triangulated 
subcategory containing the objects of $\mathcal C$.

From the commutative square 
{% eqn split_summand %}
\begin{tikzcd}
X^\prime_{-1} \ar[r]\ar[d] & X \ar[d] \\
0 \ar[r] & X_i 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
we see that $X^\prime_{-1} \to X$ is $0$ as $X \to X_i \to X$ is the identity. 
Thus, $X$ and $X^\prime_{-1}$ are summands over the cone of $X_{-1}^\prime \to X$.
{% endproof %}

**Definition**. A complex $P$ in $D(R)$ is called _perfect_ if it is quasi-isomorphic 
to a bounded complex of finitely generated projectives. The full subcategory of 
perfect objects is denoted by $\operatorname{perf} R$. 

**Proposition**. We have 
$$
    D(R)^c = \operatorname{perf} R
$$

{% proof %}
It is easy to see that 
$$
    \operatorname{perf} R \subseteq D(R)^c
$$
since compact objects are closed under finite direct sums, summands, and 
cones. 

But $\operatorname{perf} R$
- contains $R[n]$ for any $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ (a set of compact generators)
- is triangulated and 
- is closed under retracts. 

Thus, the previous proposition says 
$$
    D(R)^c \subseteq \operatorname{perf} R
$$
{% endproof %}

Finally it useful to introduce some notation for generation. 

**Definition**. Given a subcategory $\mathcal S$ of a triangulated 
category $\mathcal T$, we let $\langle \mathcal S \rangle$ denote the 
smallest triangulated subcategory of $\mathcal T$ containing $\mathcal S$. 

We also let $\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}$ denote the smallest 
triangulated, closed under retracts, containing $\mathcal S$. 