---
layout: page
title: 2021-08-31
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Adjunctions 

Between unrelated pairs of functors and equivalences lies an adjoint pair. 

Given $F: \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ and $G : \mathcal D \to \mathcal C$, we say 
_$F$ is left adjoint to $G$_ or, equivalently _$G$ is right adjoint to $F$_ and write 
$F \vdash G$ if there exists a natural isomorphism 
$$
    \nu_{X,Y} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,Y) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,GY).
$$

## Examples

- $\operatorname{Id} \vdash \operatorname{Id}$ 
- $F \vdash F^{-1}$: let $\nu : F^{-1}F \to \operatorname{Id}$ denote the natural isomorphism. 
    Then
    <center>
    {% tikz equiv_adjunc %}
        \node at (0,0) (F) {$\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,Y)$};
        \node at (4,0) (Finv) {$\operatorname{Hom}(F^{-1}FX,F^{-1}Y)$};
        \node at (4,-2) (E) {$\operatorname{Hom}(X,F^{-1}Y)$};
        \draw[->] (F) -- node[above] {$F^{-1}$} (Finv);
        \draw[->] (Finv) -- node[right] {$- \circ \nu_X^{-1}$} (E);
        \draw[->] (F) -- node[below left] {$\mu_{X,Y}$} (E);
    {% endtikz %}
    </center>
    gives the required natural isomorphism $\mu$. 
- Let $$\mathfrak f: \operatorname{Grp} \to \operatorname{Set}$$ be the _forgetful_ functor, which 
    takes a group to its underlying set. We also the the free group construction 
    $$
        F : \operatorname{Set} \to \operatorname{Grp}
    $$
    Then, $\mathfrak f \vdash F$. 
- Another forgetful functor forgets the $R$-module structure 
    $$
        \mathfrak f: \operatorname{Mod-}R \to \operatorname{Set}
    $$
    whose adjoint is the free $R$-module construction
    $$
        R^\bullet : \operatorname{Set} \to \operatorname{Mod-}R 
    $$
    The natural isomorphism is 
    $$
        \operatorname{Hom}_R(R^X, M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{Set}}(X,M) \\
        \varphi \mapsto \left( x \mapsto \varphi(e_x) \right)
    $$
    where $e_x, x \in X$ is the $R$-basis for $R^X$. 

## Units and counits 

Given an adjunction $F \vdash G$, we can canonical maps 
$$
    \eta_X := \nu(1_{FX}) : X \to GFX 
$$
giving a natural transformation $\eta : \operatorname{Id} \to GF$ called the _unit_ of the 
adjunction. 

Similarly, 
$$
    \epsilon_Y := \nu^{-1}(1_GY) : FGY \to Y
$$
gives the _counit_ $\epsilon : FG \to \operatorname{Id}$ of the adjunction. 

The diagrams
<center>
{% tikz F_FGF_F %}
    \node at (0,0) (F1) {$F$};
    \node at (2,0) (FGF) {$FGF$};
    \node at (4,0) (F2) {$F$};
    \draw[->] (F1) -- node[below] {$F(\eta)$} (FGF);
    \draw[->] (FGF) -- node[below] {$\epsilon_F$} (F2);
    \draw[->] (F1) to [out=30,in=150] node[above] {$1$} (F2); 
{% endtikz %}
</center>
and
<center>
{% tikz G_GFG_G %}
    \node at (0,0) (G1) {$G$};
    \node at (2,0) (GFG) {$GFG$};
    \node at (4,0) (G2) {$G$};
    \draw[->] (G1) -- node[below] {$\eta_G$} (GFG);
    \draw[->] (GFG) -- node[below] {$G(\epsilon)$} (G2);
    \draw[->] (G1) to [out=30,in=150] node[above] {$1$} (G2);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
both commute. 

**Theorem** $F \vdash G$ if and only if there are natural transformations 
$\eta : \operatorname{Id} \to GF$ and $\epsilon: FG \to \operatorname{Id}$ 
making the diagrams above commute. 

## Tensor-Hom adjunction

Recall that given a right $R$-module $M$ and a left $R$-module $N$ we can form the 
tensor product 
$$
    M \otimes_R N := \mathbb{Z}^{M \times N}/I
$$
where $I$ is the ideal generated by $(mr,n)-(m,rn)$, $(m_1+m_2,n)-(m_1,n)-(m_2,n)$ and 
$(m,n_1+n_2)-(m,n_1)-(m,n_2)$. 

Given a $R$-$S$-bimodule $P$, we have a map 
$$
    \nu_{N,M}: \operatorname{Hom}_R(P \otimes_S N, M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_S(N, \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,M)) \\
    \phi \mapsto \left( n \mapsto \left(p \mapsto \phi(p \otimes n) \right)\right)
$$
Let's check this givens an adjunction $P \otimes_S - \vdash \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-)$. 

First, because $\phi$ is a $R$-module homomorphism, so is $p \mapsto \phi(p \otimes n)$ for any $n \in N$. 
So the function is well-defined. 

Next, for $n \to (p \mapsto \phi(p \otimes n))$ to be an $S$-module homomorphism we need 
$$
    \phi(ps \otimes n) = \phi(p \otimes sn)
$$
which is guaranteed by the construction of the tensor product. 

Now let's check this is a bijection. Assume we have $\psi : N \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,M)$. Define 
$$
    \phi(p \otimes n) := \psi(n)(p)
$$
and 
$$
    \phi\left(\sum_i p_i \otimes n_i \right) := \sum \phi(p_i \otimes n_i).
$$
We leave it as an exercise to show that $\psi \mapsto \phi$ is well-defined and inverse to $\nu$. 

## Three functors from a ring morphism

Assume we have a ring homomorphism $f : R \to S$. This equips $S$ with the structure of $S$-$R$ bimodule 
$$
    (s,r) \cdot s^\prime = s s^\prime f(r) 
$$
We get an adjunction $S \otimes\_R - \vdash \operatorname{Hom}\_S(S,-)$. We already saw that 
$\operatorname{Hom}\_S(S,-) \cong \operatorname{Id}$. Restricting the $R$-action via $f$, we have
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_S(S,-) \cong f_\ast 
$$
We will write 
$$
    f^\ast M := S \otimes_R M 
$$
and call it _pullback_ via $f$. 

The pushforward $f_\ast$ is also isomorphic to $S \otimes_S -$ (where we have reversed the actions now). Thus, 
we get another adjunction 
$$
    f_\ast \vdash \operatorname{Hom}_R(S,-)
$$
We will write $f^! M := \operatorname{Hom}\_R(S,M)$ and call it the _twisted pullback_. 

Thus, from $f: R \to S$, we get a chain of adjunctions
$$
    f^\ast \vdash f_\ast \vdash f^!. 
$$
