---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-19
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Kernels continued 

Given a compact generator $P$ of $D(A)$ and a compact 
generator $Q$ of $D(B)$, we saw last time that $P \otimes_k Q$ 
is a compact generator for $D(A \otimes_k B)$. 

**Lemma**. If $P$ and $Q$ are compact, there is a quasi-isomorphism 
$$
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{End}(P) \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{End}(Q) 
    \to \mathbf{R} \operatorname{End}(P \otimes_k Q)
$$

{% proof %}
We have 
$$
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(P \otimes_k Q, P \otimes_k Q) \cong 
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(P, \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,P \otimes_k Q))
$$
As a $B$-module, $P \otimes_k Q$ is quasi-isomorphic to a sum of shifts $Q$ 
since we are still assuming that $k$ is field. We know that 
$$
    \bigoplus \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q) \to 
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,\bigoplus Q) 
$$
is a quasi-isomorphism. Thus, so is 
$$
    P \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q) \to 
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,P \otimes_k Q) 
$$

Appealing to the same argument shows that 
$$
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(P,P) \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q) \to 
    \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(P,P \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q)) 
$$
is a quasi-isomorphism. 
{% endproof %}

Next, we consider the functor 
$$
    M \to \Upsilon(M) := \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P, M \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B Q)
$$
where $M$ is a $A$-$B$ bimodule. Let 
$$
    Q^\vee := \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,B)
$$
as a right $B$-module. Since $Q$ is compact, the map 
$$
    Q^\vee \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B Q \to \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q)
$$
is a quasi-isomorphism. The object $Q^\vee$ is a compact generator for $D(B^{op})$ as 
$$
    (-)^\vee : (\operatorname{perf} B)^{op} \to \operatorname{perf} B^{op}
$$
is an equivalence. Thus, if we plug in the $P \otimes_k Q^\vee$ into the functor 
above we get a quasi-isomorphism between 
$$
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P, P \otimes_k Q^\vee \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B Q) \sim  
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,P) \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q)
$$
So we have 
$$
    \Upsilon : D(A \otimes_k B^{op}) \to D(\mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,P) 
    \otimes_k \mathbf{R} \operatorname{Hom}(Q,Q)^{\op})  
$$

Now let's assume that we have a compact generator $P$ of $D(A)$ and we take  
$$
    B := \mathbf{R}\operatorname{End}(P)
$$
Then $B \otimes_k P^\vee$ is a compact generator of $D(B \otimes A^{op})$. Applying 
$\Upsilon$ we get an equivalence 
$$
    \Upsilon : D(B \otimes_k A^{op}) \to D(B \otimes_k B^{op})
$$
Thus, there is some object $U$ for which 
$$
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(B, U \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B P) \sim \Delta_B
$$

Since 
$$
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(B, U \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B P) \cong 
    U \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B P
$$
we see that 
$$
    U \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B P \cong B
$$
as $B$-modules. Thus, 
$$
    \Phi_U : D(A) \to D(B) 
$$
takes the compact generator $P$ to the compact generator $B$. Moreover, it is 
fully-faithful on $P[l]$. Applying the proposition from the 
[previous class]({% link notes/2021_10_14.md %}), we have an equivalence. 

**Theorem**. For two dg-algebras $A$-$B$, if $D(A) \cong D(B)$, then there exists 
a $U \in D(B \otimes_k A^{op})$ such that 
$$
    \Phi_U : D(A) \to D(B)
$$
is equivalence. 

## Smoothness and properness

We can use bimodules to give a notation of smoothness. 

**Definition**. A dg-algebra $A$ is called _homologically 
smooth_ if $\Delta_A$ is a compact $A$-$A$ dg-bimodule. 

Recall the _global dimension_ of a ring is the maximal $n$ with 
$\operatorname{Ext}^n_R(M,N) \neq 0$ for some $M$ and $N$.

**Lemma**. Let $R$ be a ring. If $R$ is homologically smooth, 
then $R$ has finite global dimension. 

{% proof %}
Since $R$ is a compact $R$-$R$ bimodule, then it admits a finite 
length projective resolution, $P^\bullet \to \Delta_R$. Then, 
$P^i \otimes_R M$ is a projective module over $R$ and we know that 
$P^\bullet \otimes_R M$ has no cohomology except in degree $0$ where 
it is $M$. This means we have a projective resolution of $M$ of 
length at most the length of the projective resolution of $\Delta_R$. 
{% endproof %}

**Example**. Consider $R = k[x]/(x^2)$. We try to resolve $\Delta_R$ as 
a bimodule. To start, we have 
$$
    k[y,z]/(y^2,z^2) \to k[x]/(x^2) \to 0
$$
where $y,z \mapsto x$. The kernel is generated by $(y-z)$. Since 
$$
    y^2 - z^2 = (y+z)(y-z) 
$$
We see that 
$$
    (y-z) \cong k[y,z]/(y+z,y^2,z^2) \cong k[x]/(x^2)
$$
This immediately implies that 
$$
    \operatorname{Ext}^l_{k[y,z]/(y^2,z^2)}(k[x]/(x^2),k[x]/(x^2)) \neq 0 
$$
for all $l \geq 0$. In particular, $\Delta_R$ cannot be perfect, hence 
compact. So $R$ is not homologically smooth. 

**Definition**. A dg-algebra $A$ over a commutative ring $k$ is _proper_ 
over $k$ if $A$ is perfect as a $k$ dg-module (chain complex). 

In particular, we need that $H^i(A) = 0$ for all but finitely many $i$. 
