---
layout: page
title: 2021-08-24  
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Caution 

We are suppressing set-theoretic hazards for categories here. For a concise bit on 
universes and some motivation see [this post](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/255425/what-is-the-use-of-grothendieck-universes-in-category-theory)
on Stack Overflow. 

Also, I am using the convention that statements with lower case letters have implicit universal quantifiers on them as needed by the context. 

## Definition of categories

A category $\mathcal C$ is 
- a set of objects $\operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C$
- for any two $X, Y \in \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C$, written also as 
$X, Y \in \mathcal C$, a set 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y)
$$
where elements are written $f: X \to Y$, 
- and for any $X, Y, Z \in \mathcal C$, a composition 
$$
    \circ: \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \times \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(Y,Z) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Z)
$$
satisfying
    - associativity $f \circ (g \circ h) = (f \circ g) \circ h$ and 
    - unitality: for each $X \in \mathcal C$ there exists $1_X : X \to X$ so that for any $f: X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to X$ we 
    $$
        f \circ 1_X = f \ , \ 1_X \circ g = g 
    $$

## Examples of categories 

- Aside from the empty category, the simplest category is one where 
$$
    \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C = \lbrace \ast \rbrace
$$
and 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(\ast,\ast) = \lbrace 1_\ast \rbrace
$$
Composition is trivial. 

- A variant on the previous example is where we take $(N,\cdot)$ to be a monoid 
still take a single object but now set
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(\ast,\ast) = N
$$
where composition is the monoid operation. In some sense, categories are monoid-oids. 

- A category useful in algebraic topology has objects $\mathbb{N}$ with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(n,m) = 
    \begin{cases} 
        \empty & n > m \\
        f: [n] \to [m] & f \text{ non-decreasing }   
    \end{cases} 
$$

- One closer to linear algebra also has objects $\mathbb{N}$ but has 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(n,m) = \operatorname{Hom}_k (k^n, k^m)
$$
where $k$ is a field. Here the morphism spaces are matrices. 

- Given a category $\mathcal C$, we can make another, the opposite category, 
$\mathcal C^{op}$ whose objects are the same but with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C^{op}}(X,Y) = \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(Y,X) 
$$

## Reminder on modules

Let $R$ be a (unital) ring. Recall a left $R$-module $M$ is the data of an abelian group 
$(M,+)$ and an action map $\cdot : R \times M \to M$ so that the action is linear 
- $r \cdot (m_1 + m_2) = r \cdot m_1 + r \cdot m_2$
- $(r_1 + r_2) \cdot m = r_1 \cdot m + r_2 \cdot m$, ie

the action satisfies 
- $(r_1r_2) \cdot m = r_1 \cdot (r_2 \cdot m)$ and 
- $1 \cdot m = m$

which expresses the fact that map $R \to \operatorname{End}(M)$ is a monoid homomorphism. 
We will often suppress the $\cdot$ notation for the action itself and just concatenate 
the symbols. 

Given a two $R$-modules $M_1,M_2$, a $R$-module morphism $f : M_1 \to M_2$ is an abelian 
groups homomorphism satisfying 
- $f(r \cdot m) = r \cdot f(m)$.

## Examples 

- Calling back to linear algebra, we can take $R = k$ a field and $M = k^n$ with scalar 
multiplication. 

- More important for our course is the following. Let $f : R \to S$ be a homomorphism of 
rings and let $N$ be an $S$-module. Then we can equip the underlying abelian group $N$ 
with an $R$-module structure by declaring
$$
    r \cdot n := f(r) n. 
$$
The resulting $R$-module will be denoted by $f_\ast N$ and is called the *pushforward* 
of $N$. (The language will be clearer when we get to some geometry.)

- As an example of pushforward, consider the inclusion $i: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{C}$ and 
the $\mathbb{R}$-vector space $i_\ast \mathbb{C}$. We have $i_\ast \mathbb{C} \cong 
\mathbb{R}^2$ since $\dim_{\mathbb{R}} \mathbb{C} = 2$. 

- Any ideal $I \leq R$ is an $R$-module as is any quotient $R/I$. 

Let us look at the set $\operatorname{Hom}_R(R,R)$. We have an evaluation map 
$$
    ev_1 : \operatorname{Hom}_R(R,R) \to R \\
    f \mapsto f(1). 
$$
The value at $1$ complemently determines $f$ since
$$
    f(r) = f(r \cdot 1) = r f(1). 
$$
We see that $f$ is given by *right multiplication* by $f(1)$. Since left multiplication and 
right multiplication commute, there is an inverse map 
$$
    R  \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(R,R) \\
    r  \mapsto (r^\prime \mapsto r^\prime r). 
$$

In general, left multiplication is not an $R$-module homomorphism. For the function 
$$
    m_r (r^\prime) = r r^\prime
$$
saying that $m_r (r^\prime) = r^\prime m_r(1)$ is just saying that 
$$
    r^\prime r = r r^\prime
$$
which is only true for all $r^\prime$ if $r \in Z(R)$ the center of $R$. 

## Modules over the path algebra 

We look at an extended example now. Let $Q$ be a finite direct graph, also known as 
a *quiver*. Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Then the *path algebra* $RQ$ is the free $R$-module 
on the set of paths in $Q$ with multiplication given by path concatenation. 

For a particularly simple example, consider the following quiver 

<center>
{% tikz example %}
    \node at (0,0) (0) {$\bullet$};
    \node at (2,0) (1) {$\bullet$};
    \draw [->] (0) to [out=30,in=150] (1); 
    \draw [->] (0) to [out=-30,in=-150] (1);
{% endtikz %}
</center>

and use $Q$ to denote it also. Then we have four paths. The two arrows we will denote 
as $a$ and $b$ plus the length $0$ loops at the two nodes, $e_0$ and $e_1$. Thus
$$
    RQ = Re_0 \oplus Ra \oplus Rb \oplus Re_1
$$
and the nonzero products are 
$$
    ae_0 = a = e_1a \ , \ be_0 = b = e_1b \ , \ e_0^2 = e_0 \ , \ e_1^2 = e_1.
$$

Let $M$ be a $RQ$-module. Let us repackage the information present in the $RQ$-module 
structure in terms of more familiar data. Note that 
$$
    1 = e_0 + e_1 
$$
in $RQ$. So we can write 
$$
    M = e_0 M \oplus e_1 M. 
$$
For shorthand, set $M_i = e_i M$. Each $M_i$ is only an $R$-module. For each arrow $a$ 
in $Q$, action by $a$ gives a map 
$$
    \phi_a : M_{h(a)} \to M_{t(a)}
$$
which is $R$-linear. So we have an assignment 
$$
    M \mapsto \lbrace M_i, \phi_a : M_{h(a)} \to M_{t(a)} \mid i \in Q_0, a \in Q_1 \rbrace
$$
This process is reversible. Given $(M_i, \phi_a)$, we set 
$$ 
    M = \bigoplus_i M_i
$$
and let $a$ act by $\phi_a$ on $M$. 

Given a morphism $f : M \to M^\prime$ of $RQ$-modules, since 
$f(e_i M) = e_i f(M)$ we see we have induced maps $f_i : M_i \to M_i^\prime$. Since 
$f(am) = af(m)$, we see that 
$$
    f_i \circ \phi_a = \phi_a \circ f_i
$$
for any arrow $a$. This process is also reversible. 

Thus the data of $RQ$-modules and their morphisms is the same as collections of $R$-modules 
indexed by vertices with $R$-linear maps indexed by arrows of $Q$. 

This is the first example of an equivalence of categories. 