---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-02
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Mutations and braid group actions

When people say SOD they usually mean a longer one in general. 
We can give a general definition along the lines of the two term 
one. 

**Definition**. A sequence of $\mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_l$ of 
full triangulated subcategories of $\mathcal T$ is a semi-orthogonal 
decomposition if 
- for each $1 \leq i \leq l$ we have 
$$
    \mathcal A_i \subseteq {}^\perp\langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{i-1} \rangle 
    \cap \langle \mathcal A_{i+1},\ldots,\mathcal A_l \rangle^\perp 
$$
- for each object $X$ of $\mathcal T$ there is a diagram 
{% eqn longer_sod %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 0 \ar[rr] & & X_l \ar[rr] \ar[dl] & & X_{l-1} \ar[r] \ar[dl] & \cdots \ar[r] & X_1 \ar[rr] & & X \ar[dl]  \\
 & \ar[ul,dashed] A_l & & \ar[ul,dashed] A_{l-1} & & & & \ar[ul,dashed] A_1 & 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
with $A_i \in \mathcal A_i$ for each $i$, the dashed arrows are of homological degree $1$, 
and the triangles are actual triangles in $\mathcal T$. 

Let's assume that each of the $\mathcal A_i$ are admissible subcategories. 
Then, we are free to mutate them. 

Given a length $l$ SOD $\langle \mathcal A_1, \ldots, \mathcal A_l \rangle$, we 
have the left mutation at $i$
$$
    \mathbf{L}_i := \langle \mathcal A_1, \ldots, \mathcal A_{i-1}, \mathcal A_{i+1}^\prime, 
    \mathcal A_i, \mathcal A_{i+2}, \ldots, \mathcal A_l \rangle 
$$
with 
$$
    \mathcal A_{i+1}^\prime := {}^\perp\langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{i-1} \rangle 
    \cap \langle \mathcal A_i, \mathcal A_{i+1},\ldots,\mathcal A_l \rangle^\perp 
$$
and right mutation 
$$
    \mathbf{R}_i := \langle \mathcal A_1, \ldots, \mathcal A_{i-1}, \mathcal A_{i+1}, 
    \mathcal A_i^{\prime}, \mathcal A_{i+2}, \ldots, \mathcal A_l \rangle 
$$
with 
$$
    \mathcal A_i^\prime := {}^\perp\langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{i-1},\mathcal A_{i+1} \rangle 
    \cap \langle \mathcal A_{i+2},\ldots,\mathcal A_l \rangle^\perp 
$$
Each is can be accomplishbed via left/right mutation in the subcategory $\langle \mathcal A_i, 
\mathcal A_{i+1} \rangle$. Given this, we have already seen that $\mathbf{L}_i^{-1} 
= \mathbf{R}_i$ 

Let $\operatorname{SOD}_l(\mathcal T)$ denote the set of semi-orthogonal 
decompositions of length $l$. Then, we get an action of the free group on $\{1,\ldots,l\}$ 
on $\operatorname{SOD}_l(\mathcal T)$ with $j$ acting via $\mathbf{L}_j$. 

**Proposition**. We have the following relations: 
- if $|i - j| > 1$, 
$$
    \mathbf{L}_i \mathbf{L}_j = \mathbf{L}_j \mathbf{L}_i 
$$
- 
$$
    \mathbf{L}_i \mathbf{L}_{i+1} \mathbf{L}_i = \mathbf{L}_{i+1}\mathbf{L}_i \mathbf{L}_{i+1}
$$

{% proof %}
Since the categories 
$$
    \langle \mathcal A_i, \mathcal A_{i+1} \rangle = 
    \langle \mathcal A_{i+1}^\prime, \mathcal A_i \rangle = 
    \langle \mathcal A_{i+1}, \mathcal A_i^\prime \rangle 
$$
all coincide, we can compute the left or right orthogonal using 
any of them when they all lie on the same the term. Assume that $i < j$ for simplicity. 
Then the $j$-th component of $\mathbf{L}_i \mathbf{L}_j$ is 
$$
    {}^\perp\langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{j-1} \rangle 
    \cap \langle \mathcal A_{j+1},\ldots,\mathcal A_l \rangle^\perp
$$
where as the $j$-th component of $\mathbf{L}_j \mathbf{L}_i$ is 
$$
    {}^\perp\langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{j+1}^\prime, 
    \mathcal A_j,\ldots,\mathcal A_{j-1} \rangle 
    \cap \langle \mathcal A_{j+1},\ldots,\mathcal A_l \rangle^\perp
$$
Since
$$
    \langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{j-1} \rangle = 
    \langle \mathcal A_1,\ldots,\mathcal A_{i+1}^\prime, 
    \mathcal A_i,\ldots,\mathcal A_{j-1} \rangle 
$$
these coincide. Similarly, one can check the other components coincide in the case 
$|i - j| > 1$. 

For the other identity, it suffices to consider the case $\langle \mathcal A, 
\mathcal B, \mathcal C \rangle$. We only need to identity two components as any 
component is determined by the two others. 

The third component of both is $\mathcal A$ by definition. 

The second component of $\mathbf{L}_1 \mathbf{L}_2 \mathbf{L}_1$ is 
$$
    \mathcal B^\prime = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal C \rangle^\perp
$$
Since 
$$
    \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle = \mathcal C^\perp
$$
and 
$$
    \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal C \rangle^\perp = 
    \mathcal A^\perp \cap \mathcal C^\perp
$$
we see that
$$
    \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle \cap \mathcal A^\perp 
    = \mathcal B^\prime 
$$

The second component of $\mathbf{L}_2 \mathbf{L}_1 \mathbf{L}_2$ is 
$$
    \widetilde{\mathcal B}^{\prime} = {}^\perp \left( \mathcal C^{\prime\prime} \right) \cap \mathcal A^\perp 
$$
where 
$$
    \mathcal C^{\prime \prime} = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle^\perp
$$
So
$$
    \widetilde{\mathcal B}^{\prime} = {}^\perp \left( \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle^\perp \right) \cap \mathcal A^\perp 
$$
But 
$$
    {}^\perp \left( \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle^\perp \right) 
    = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle 
$$
since we have an SOD 
$$
    \langle \mathcal C^{\prime \prime}, \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle \rangle \rangle 
$$
Thus, 
$$
    \mathcal B^\prime  = \widetilde{\mathcal B}^{\prime} 
$$
{% endproof %}

The group with the presentation
$$
    B_{n+1} := \langle \sigma_1, \ldots, \sigma_n \mid \sigma_i\sigma_j = \sigma_j\sigma_i \text { if } |i-j| > 1 
    \text{ and } \sigma_i\sigma_{i+1}\sigma_i = \sigma_{i+1}\sigma_i \sigma_{i+1} \rangle 
$$
has a natural geometric meaning. It is the _braid group on $n+1$ strands_. This can be 
described as follows. 

Elements of this group are isotopy classes in $\mathbb{R}^3$ of smooth cobordisms 
between the points $n+1$ points on a line in the plane and 
$n+1$ points on a parallel line in the plane. Collapsing the points should not 
know the strands. Composition is concatenation. 

For example, 
{% eqn example %}
\begin{tikzpicture}[
  /pgf/braid/.cd,
  style strands={1}{gray,thick},
  style strands={2}{gray,thick},
  style strands={3}{gray,thick},
  number of strands=3
  ]

  \braid (identity) at (0,0) 1 s_2^{-1} s_1;
\end{tikzpicture}
{% endeqn %}
is an element of $B_3$ represented by $s_1 s_2^{-1}$ (reading left to right). 

It is straightforward to see that the relations in $B_{n+1}$ hold for the braid group. 
It is a fact, due to (Emil) [Artin](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1969218), 
that those generate all the relations. 

As a consequence of the presentation, we get an action of $B_l$ the set 
of semi-orthogonal decompositions of length $l$. Not much is known about this action 
in general. For example, can we classify the orbits in some concrete way? 