---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-16
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Strong generation and saturation 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal T$ be a triangulated 
category linear over a field $k$. We say $\mathcal T$ is 
_Ext-finite_ if for any pair of objects $X$ and $Y$ we 
have 
$$
\dim_k \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} \operatorname{Hom}(X,Y[j]) 
< \infty 
$$
An additive functor $H : \mathcal T \to \operatorname{Vect} k$ 
is _Ext-finite_ if for any object $X$ we have 
$$
\dim_k \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} H(X[j]) < \infty
$$

**Lemma**. Let $\mathcal T$ be an Ext-finite triangulated category 
and let $X$ and $Y$ be objects. Then there exists a triangle 
$$
	Z \to X \to X^\prime \to Z[1]
$$
where $Z \in \langle Y \rangle_0$ and $X \to X^\prime$ is 
$\langle Y \rangle_0$-ghost. 

{% proof %}
We introduce some notation. For 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y 
$$
we really mean 
$$
\bigoplus_{i=1}^d Y[n_i]
$$
where $d$ is the dimension of $\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(Y[j],X)$ 
and $n_1,\ldots,n_d$ are the homological degrees of a basis. 

This object is independent of the basis up to isomorphism. 

There is a natural evaluation map 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y \to X
$$
whose action of the factor $Y[n_i]$ is the corresponding map 
in the basis for $\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(Y[j],X)$. 

We set 
$$
Z = \operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y 
$$
and use the triangle 
$$
Z \to X \to X^\prime \to Z[1]
$$
where $X^\prime$ is the cone over $Z \to X$. 

By construction, any map $Y[l] \to X$ will lift to $Y[l] \to Z$. 
Just take the factor in $Z$ corresponding to $Y[l] \to X$. Then, 
the composition $Y[l] \to X \to X^\prime$ will be $0$. So 
$X \to X^\prime$ is $\langle Y \rangle_0$-ghost. 
{% endproof %}

Assume we have a cohomological functor $H : \mathcal T^{op} \to 
\operatorname{Vect} k$ which is Ext-finite. We want to employ the 
"resolution" procedure from Brown representability to $H$ with a 
single object (and its shifts) playing the role of the compact 
generators. 

We start with 
$$
X_0 := \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} H(G[j]) \otimes_k G[j]
$$
Since the summands of $X_0$ are indexed by elements $H(G[j])$, 
there is a natural element of $H(X_0)$ given by using the 
element from the index. From Yoneda, we get a natural 
transformation 
$$
\xi_0 : h^{X_0} \to H
$$

Inductively, we set 
$$
K_i(G[j]) := \ker\left( \xi_i(G[j]): \operatorname{Hom}(G[j],X_i) \to 
H(G[j]) \right)
$$
and 
$$
Y_i := \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} K_i(G[j]) \otimes_k G[j]
$$
We have natural map $Y_i \to X_i$ and we let 
$$
X_{i+1} = \operatorname{cone}(Y_i \to X_i)
$$

Note that from Ext-finiteness of $\mathcal T$ and $H$ all this 
constructions yield well-defined objects of $\mathcal T$. 

As in the proof of Brown Representability, we get a natural 
transformation 
$$
\xi_{i+1} : h^{X_i} \to H 
$$
such that the diagram 
{% eqn brown_redux %}
\begin{tikzcd}
h^{X_i} \ar[dd] \ar[dr] & \\
& H \\
h^{X_{i+1}} \ar[ur] 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

Since we do not have anything beyond finite coproducts, we cannot 
pass to the homotopy colimit to achieve a representing object on 
the thick subcategory generated by $G$ so we need to prove that 
after finite number of steps we can do this. 

**Lemma**. On $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, $H$ is isomorphic to a 
retract of $h^{X_1}$. 

{% proof %}
For any object $E \in \overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, we 
have a commutative diagram 
{% eqn retract_H %}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \ar[r] & \ker \xi_0(E) \ar[r] \ar[rd,"0"] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_0) \ar[r] \ar[d] & H(E)
\ar[d,"="] \ar[r] & 0 \\
& & \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) \ar[r] & H(E) \ar[r] & 0 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
where the diagonal map vanishes from the construction $X_1$. Thus, we 
get a map 
$$
H(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) 
$$
which splits 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) \to H(E)
$$
This construction is natural in $E$. 
{% endproof %}

So on $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, we have represented our 
object, at least allowing for retracts. To achieve this we needed that
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(S,X_i) \to H(X_i) \to 0
$$
is exact and the composition 
$$
\ker \xi_i(S) \to \operatorname{Hom}(S,X_i) \to 
\operatorname{Hom}(S,X_{i+1})
$$
is zero. 

We will show that we can achieve this for $\overline{\langle G 
\rangle}\_n$ by composing a sequence of the maps $X_i \to X_{i+1}$. 

**Proposition**. For each $n \geq 1$, there is an $M > 0$ such that 
$H$ is isomorphic to a retract of $X_M$ on 
$\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n$. 

{% proof %}
We will prove the following statement. 

For each $n$ there is a $N$ 
such that for any $E$ in $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n$ we have that 
* the sequence
$$
	\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_N) \to H(E) \to 0
$$
is exact and 
* the composition 
$$
	\ker \xi_N(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_N) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{N+2}) 
$$
is $0$. 

Then we get $H$ is isomorphic to a retract of $h^{X_{N+2}}$ on 
$\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n$. 

The base case of the induction is the previous lemma. Assume it is 
true for $n$. Note it suffices to prove it for 
$\langle G \rangle_0 \ast \langle G \rangle_n$ since the two 
conditions are preserved under passage to sums, shifts, and summands. 

Take $E$ lying in a triangle 
$$
	F \to E \to E^\prime \to F[1]
$$
with $F \in \langle G \rangle_0$ and $E^\prime \in \langle 
G \rangle_n$. Then for each $m$, we have the commutative diagram 
{% eqn kernel_cokernel_H %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 & 0 \ar[d] & 0 \ar[d] & 0 \ar[d] & 0 \ar[d] \\
\cdots \ar[r] & \operatorname{ker} \xi_m(E^\prime) \ar[d]  \ar[r]  & 
\ker \xi_m(E) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & 
\ker \xi_m(F) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & \ker \xi_m(E^\prime[-1]) \ar[d]  \ar[r] 
& \cdots \\
\cdots  \ar[r] & \operatorname{Hom}(E^\prime,X_m) \ar[d] \ar[r] 
 & \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_m) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(F,X_m) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(E^\prime[-1],X_m) \ar[d] \ar[r]  & \cdots \\
\cdots \ar[r]  & H(E^\prime) \ar[r]  \ar[d] & \ar[d] H(E) \ar[r]  & 
H(F) \ar[d] \ar[r]  & H(E^\prime[-1]) \ar[d] \ar[r]  & \cdots \\ 
\cdots \ar[r]  & \operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E^\prime) \ar[d] \ar[r]  & 
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(F) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E^\prime[-1]) \ar[d]  \ar[r] & \cdots \\
& 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
We can take $m$ large enough so that 
$$
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E^\prime) = \operatorname{coker} \xi_m(F) = 0
$$
A diagram chase gives a injective map 
$$
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E) \to \operatorname{ker} \xi_m(E^\prime[-1])
$$
Taking $m$ larger if necessary we have 
$$
\operatorname{coker} \xi_m(E) = 0 
$$
so 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_m) \to H(E) \to 0 
$$
is exact. 

Finally, $m^\prime > m$ so that 
$$
\operatorname{ker} \xi_m(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{m^\prime})
$$
and 
$$
\operatorname{ker} \xi_m(F) \to \operatorname{Hom}(F,X_{m^\prime})
$$
are both $0$ maps. 

{% endproof %}

If we know that for some large enough $n$ we have 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \mathcal T
$$
then we get the following corollary due to 
[Bondal and Van den Bergh](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0204218)

**Corollary**. If $\mathcal T$ is a strongly generated Ext-finite triangulated 
category and $H$ is an Ext-finite (co)homological functor, then $H$ 
is representable by a retract of an object of $\mathcal T$.

Note that being a strongly generated triangulated category is a condition 
preserved by taking opposites. 