---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-18
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Strong generation in examples

We saw last time that being strongly generated 
resulted in representability of many (co)homological 
functors. 

Today, we look at when familiar examples of triangulated 
categories are strongly generated. 

**Question**. Let $R$ be a Noetherian commutative 
ring. When is $D^b(\operatorname{mod} R)$ strongly 
generated? When is $\operatorname{perf} R$? 

**Definition**. We say that $G$ is a _generator_ of a 
triangulated category $\mathcal T$ for every $E \in 
\mathcal T$ there is some $n$ with 
$$
    E \in \overline{\langle G \rangle}_n
$$

Note there is no a priori uniform, in $E$, bound on $n$. 

**Lemma**. If $\mathcal T$ is strongly generated, then 
any generator of $\mathcal T$ is a strong generator. 

{% proof %}
Assume that 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \mathcal T
$$
and $H$ is a generator. Then there is some $m$ with 
$$
    G \in \overline{\langle H \rangle}_m 
$$
But then 
$$
    \mathcal T = \overline{\langle G \rangle}_n \subseteq 
    \overline{\langle \overline{\langle H \rangle}_m \rangle}_n 
    = \overline{\langle H \rangle}_{nm} \subset \mathcal T
$$

{% endproof %}

**Example**. $R$ is a always a generator for $\operatorname{perf} R$. 
So if $\operatorname{perf} R$ is strongly generated then $R$ must 
also be a strong generator. 

**Lemma**. Let $F: \mathcal T \to \mathcal S$ be an exact, 
essentially surjective functor. If $\mathcal T$ is strongly generated, 
then so is $\mathcal S$. 

{% proof %}
We have 
$$
F\left( \overline{\langle X \rangle}_m \right) \subset 
\overline{\langle FX \rangle}_m 
$$
So if $F\mathcal T = \mathcal S$ and $\overline{\langle X \rangle}_m = 
\mathcal T$, we get 
$$
\overline{\langle FX \rangle}_m = \mathcal S
$$
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. Let $\mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle$ 
be a semi-orthogonal decomposition. Then $\mathcal T$ is strongly generated 
if and only if $\mathcal A$ and $\mathcal B$ both are. 

{% proof %}
In a SOD, we have essentially surjective functors 
$$
\mathcal T \to \mathcal A \\
\mathcal T \to \mathcal B
$$
so if $\mathcal T$ is strongly generated then so are both 
$\mathcal A$ and $\mathcal B$. 

Assume that $G$ is a strong generator of $\mathcal A$ and $H$ is 
strong generator of $\mathcal B$. In an SOD, any object sits in a triangle
$$
    B \to X \to A \to B[1]
$$
with $A \in \mathcal A$ and $B \in \mathcal B$. Since 
$$
    A \in \overline{\langle G \rangle}_m
$$
and 
$$
    B \in \overline{\langle H \rangle}_n 
$$
we have 
$$
    X \in \overline{\langle G \oplus H \rangle}_{mn}
$$
{% endproof %}

Assume that Noetherian commutative $R$ is strong generator 
for $\operatorname{perf} R$. 
We know that the ideal of $R$ is uniformly nilpotent and this 
ideal is exactly the maps in $D(R)$ which induce the zero map 
on cohomology. 

Let $t$ be a natural number. 
Let $M$ be a finitely generated module and $N$ an $R$-module. 
Then, taking a truncation of projective resolution of $M$ 
we see there is perfect complex $P$ with a map $P \to M$ 
such that 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(P,N[i]) \to \operatorname{Hom}(M,N[i])
$$
is an isomorphism for $0 \leq i \leq t$. 

Now take $N = R$. If for $t > 1$
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(M,R[t]) = 0 
$$
then we see that $M$ is a retract of a perfect complex of 
length $t$. 

Since any $n$-fold extension can be factored into a composition 
of extensions, the uniform bound on the nilpotence tell us 
that every finitely has a projective resolution of length 
at most the minimal number $t$ with 
$$
 \operatorname{perf} R = \overline{\langle R \rangle}_t
$$

As a consequence, 
$$
D^b(\operatorname{mod} R) = \operatorname{perf} R
$$

Recall that we can test for regularity of local ring 
$(R,\mathfrak m)$ by asking whether the projective 
dimension of $k(\mathfrak{m})$ is finite. 

**Corollary**. $R$ is a strong generator for 
$\operatorname{perf} R$ if and only if $R$ is regular, 
ie all local rings are regular. 

So strong generation of $\operatorname{perf} R$ imposes 
strong conditions on the ring $R$. It turns out 
that is not the case for $D^b(\operatorname{mod} R)$. 

The following result is due to 
[Rouquier](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0310134).

**Theorem**. If $R$ is a finitely-generated $k$-algebra 
with $k$ a perfect field, then $D^b(\operatorname{mod} R)$ 
is strongly generated. 

This result has since been 
[improved](https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04484).