---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-14
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Back to derived equivalences

Assume we have an abelian category $\mathcal A$ with 
$D(\mathcal A)$ compactly generated. Let $P$ be a 
compact object. 

Let
$$
    A := \mathbf{R}\operatorname{End}(P)
$$
be the dg-algebra of endomorphism. (Here we assume that 
$P$ is quasi-isomorphic to a K-projective or K-injective 
complex). 

We have a exact functor 
$$
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,-) : D(\mathcal A) \to D(A)
$$

**Proposition**. If 
$$
    \overline{\langle P \rangle} = D(A)^c
$$
then $\mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,-)$ is an equivalence. 

{% proof %}
Let $F := \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,-)$ for ease of notation.

Let $\mathcal C$ be the full subcategory consisting of $X \in D(\mathcal A)$ 
such that 
$$
    F: \operatorname{Hom}(P,X) \to \operatorname{Hom}(FP,FX)
$$
is an isomorphism. By construction, $P[l] \in \mathcal C$ for all 
$l \in \mathbb{Z}$. Moreover,  $\mathcal C$ is 
- triangulated and
- closed under $\bigoplus$ as $P$ is compact. 

Thus, $\mathcal C = D(\mathcal A)$ as we assumed $D(\mathcal A)$ is 
compactly generated. 

Next, let $\mathcal D$ be the full subcategory $D(\mathcal A)$ consisting 
of objects $X$ such that 
$$
    F : \operatorname{Hom}(X,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}(FX,FY)
$$  
is an isomorphism for all $Y \in D(\mathcal A)$. We know that $P \in \mathcal D$ 
from the previous step. Moreover, $\mathcal D$ is 
- triangulated and 
- closed under coproducts since 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(\bigoplus X_a, Y) \cong \prod \operatorname{Hom}(X_a,Y)
$$
and $F$ commutes with coproducts. Thus $\mathcal D = D(\mathcal A)$. 

Finally, let $\mathcal E$ be the essential image of $F$. We have $A[l] \in 
\mathcal E$ for all $l \in \mathbb{Z}$. Moreover, $\mathcal E$, triangulated 
since we any $\phi: M \to N$ in $\mathcal E$ is of the form 
$F(\psi)$ by the previous step and the cone $\psi$ maps to the cone of 
$\phi$. $\mathcal E$ is closed under coproducts since $F$ commutes with them. 
Thus $\mathcal E = D(A)$ and we see that $F$ is fully-faithful and essentially 
surjective. 
{% endproof %}

We can extract the proof technique of the previous statement. 

**Proposition**. Let $F: \mathcal T \to \mathcal S$ be an exact functor 
between compactly generated triangulated categories. Assume there a set of 
compact generators $X_a$ for $\mathcal T$ such that 
- $F(X_a)$ is a set of compact generators for $\mathcal S$ and 
- 
$$
    F : \operatorname{Hom}(X_a,X_{a^\prime}) \to \operatorname{Hom}(FX_a,FX_{a^\prime})
$$
is fully-faithful for all $a,a^\prime$.

Then, $F$ is an equivalence. 

The previous proposition gives a reasonable criteria to describe 
$D(\mathcal A)$ when you have a compact generator. If we know that 
$$
    H^\ast(A) = H^0(A)
$$
then we still don't know that $D(\mathcal A) \cong D(H^0(A))$ just yet. 
We need to say something more. 

Let $A$ and $B$ be dg-modules and $U$ be a dg-$A$-$B$-bimodule. Then, 
we have a functor 
$$
    U \otimes_B - : \operatorname{Mod} B \to \operatorname{Mod} A
$$
where we grade via
$$
    (U \otimes_B N)^i = \sum_{p+q=i} U^p \otimes_B N^q
$$
and use the differential 
$$
    \delta(u \otimes n) = \delta_U(u) \otimes n + (-1)^{|u|} u \otimes \delta(n) 
$$

We can derive this, say using K-projective resolutions, to get 
$$
    U \overset{L}{\otimes}_B - : D(B) \to D(A)
$$

As with the case of usual modules, we also have a right adjoint 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_A (U,-) : \operatorname{Mod} A \to \operatorname{Mod} B
$$
and its derived version 
$$
    \mathbb{R} \operatorname{Hom}_A (U,-) : D(A) \to D(B)
$$

We can to consider these functor in a special case. Let $f: A \to B$ be 
quasi-isomorphism of dg-algebras. Then, $B$ is a $A$-$B$ dg-bimodule. 

**Proposition**. If $f: A \to B$ is a quasi-isomorphism, then 
$$
    B \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_A - : D(A) \to D(B)
$$
is an equivalence. 

{% proof %}
We apply the previous proposition in the case 
$F = B \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_A -$. Note that 
$$
    B \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_A A[l] \cong B[l]
$$
for each $l \in \mathbb{Z}$. Thus $F$ takes a set of compact generators 
to a set of compact generators. Moreover, multiplication 
$$
    a \mapsto a^\prime a 
$$
goes to multiplication by $f(a^\prime)$. Since $f$ is quasi-isomorphism, 
we see that $F$ is fully-faithful on subcategory consisting of the $A[l]$. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. If $A$ is a dg-algebra with $H^i(A) = 0$ for $i \neq 0$, then 
$A$ and $H^0(A)$ are quasi-isomorphic. 

{% proof %}
Let 
$$
    (\tau_{\geq l} A)^i = 
    \begin{cases} 
    A^i & i > l \\ 
    A^l/\delta A^{l-1} & i = l \\
    0 & i < l 
    \end{cases}
$$
Then, we have a have a homomorphism $A \to \tau_{\geq l} A$ which is a 
quasi-isomorphism in degrees $\geq l$. If $H^i(A) = 0$ for $i < l$, 
then it is a quasi-isomorphism overall. 

Similarly, for
$$
    (\tau_{\leq l} A)^i = 
    \begin{cases} 
    A^i & i < l \\ 
    \ker \delta^l & i = l \\
    0 & i > l 
    \end{cases}
$$
we have a homomorphism $\tau_{\leq l} A \to A$ which is a quasi-isomorphism 
in degrees $\leq l$ and overall if $H^i(A) = 0$ for $i > l$. 

If $H^i(A) = 0$ for $i \neq 0$, then 
{% eqn roof %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    \tau_{\leq 0} A \ar[r] \ar[d] & A \\
    \tau_{\geq 0} \tau_{\leq 0} A
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
is diagram with quasi-isomorphisms and
$$
    \tau_{\geq 0} \tau_{\leq 0} A \cong H^0(A)
$$
given the diagram of quasi-isomorphisms. 
{% endproof %}

From our discussion before, if we assume that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P,P[l]) = 0 \text{ for } l \neq 0
$$
then we get 

**Proposition**. $D(\mathcal A) \cong D(R)$ where $R$ is 
the ring $R = \operatorname{Hom}(P,P)$. 

{% proof %}
We saw already that $D(\mathcal A) \cong D(A)$ where 
$$
    A = \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(P,P)
$$
The previous result shows that 
$$
    D(A) \cong D(R). 
$$
{% endproof %}

This gives us our recognition principle. Specializing to the 
case that $\mathcal A = \operatorname{Mod} S$ for a ring $S$, 
we have the following statement which is originally due 
to Rickard. 

**Proposition**. Let $R$ and $S$ be rings. There is a 
equivalence $D(R) \cong D(S)$ if and only if there exists 
a perfect complex $P \in D(R)$ with 
- 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(R)}(P,P][l]) = 
    \begin{cases}
        S & l = 0 \\
        0 & l \neq 0 
    \end{cases}
$$
- the smallest thick triangulated subcategory generated by 
$P$ is all of $D(R)^c$. 

## Kernels and integral transforms 

We work here over a field $k$ for simplicity. These statements 
remain fine if we assume things involved are free (or flat) over 
$k$. In general, we would work the derived tensor product 
$B \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_k A$ as a dg-algebra. Deriving 
this is beyond the scope of this course since dg-algebras do not 
form an additive category. 

DG-bimodules give functors. We introduce some notation. 
Given a $B$-$A$ dg-module $U$, we write 
$$
    \Phi_U (M) := U \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_A - 
$$

We can lift the identity functor to 
a bimodule using $A$ as a $A$-$A$ bimodule since 
$$
    A \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_A M \cong M 
$$
In general, this bimodule is 
denoted by $\Delta_A$ and called the _diagonal bimodule_. 

Furthermore, we can lift composition to the level of bimodules. 
Let $A,B,C$ be dg-algebras. Assume we have a $B$-$A$ dg-module 
$U$ and a $C$-$A$ dg-module $V$. Then we can construct a 
$A$-$C$ bimodule via 
$$
    V \star U := V \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B U 
$$

**Proposition**. We have a natural isomorphism 
$$
    \Phi_{V \star U} \cong \Phi_V \circ \Phi_U
$$

{% proof %}
We can assume that $U$ and $V$ are both K-projective. Then 
for $K$-projective $M$ we have 
$$
    \Phi_V \circ \Phi_U (M) = V \otimes_B U \otimes_A M 
$$
which is just $\Phi_{V \star U}(M)$. 
{% endproof %}

The bimodules of the form $N \otimes_k M$ act like projections as 
$$
    (N \otimes_k M) \otimes_A M^\prime = N \otimes_k (M \otimes_A M^\prime) 
$$
lies in the additive category generated by $N$. 

If we have compact generators, then taking this exterior product 
gives another compact generator. 

**Proposition**. Let $P$ be a compact generator of $D(A)$ and $Q$ a 
compact generator of $D(B)$. Then $P \otimes_k Q$ is a compact 
generator of $D(A \otimes_k B)$. 

{% proof %}
We first check that $P \otimes_k Q$ is compact. We have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P \otimes_k Q, \bigoplus M_a) \cong 
    \operatorname{Hom}(P, \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,\bigoplus M_a))
$$
Since $Q$ is compact, we have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P, \bigoplus \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,M_a)) \cong 
    \operatorname{Hom}(P, \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,\bigoplus M_a))
$$
Since $P$ is compact, 
$$
    \bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(P, \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,M_a)) \cong
    \operatorname{Hom}(P, \bigoplus \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}(Q,M_a)) 
$$

Next, we check generation. It turns out easier to show that $P \otimes_k Q$ 
generates a set of compact objects. Given this, the smallest thick triangulated 
category containing $P \otimes_k Q$ is all compact objects. 

Therefore, we just need to generate $A \otimes_k B$. We know that 
$$
    A \in \overline{\langle P \rangle}
$$
Since $\otimes_k Q$ is exact, we have 
$$
    A \otimes_k Q \in \overline{\langle P \otimes_k Q \rangle}
$$
We also have 
$$
    B \in \overline{\langle Q \rangle}
$$
so we have 
$$
    A \otimes_k B \in \overline{\langle A \otimes_k Q \rangle}
$$
Combining the two, we have 
$$
    A \otimes_k B \in \overline{\langle P \otimes_k Q \rangle}
$$
{% endproof %}