---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-30
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Adjunctions and derivation

Suppose we are given two additive functors between abelian categories 
$F: \mathcal A \to \mathcal B$ and $G: \mathcal B \to \mathcal A$ 
which form an adjoint $F \vdash G$. 

These immediately yield an adjoint pair at the level of the homotopy 
categories
$$
    F: K(\mathcal A) \leftrightarrows K(\mathcal B) : G
$$

**Lemma**. Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough projectives and 
countable sums while $\mathcal B$ has enough injectives and countable 
products. Then we have adjoint pair $\mathbf{L}F \vdash \mathbf{R}G$. 

{% proof %}
Let $P \to X$ be a quasi-isomorphism with $P$ K-projective and 
let $Y \to I$ be a quasi-isomorphism with $I$ K-injective. 
We have a chain of natural isomorphisms
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal B)}(\mathbf{L}F X, Y ) & \cong
        \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal B)}(F P, Y) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal B)}(FP,I) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(P,GI) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal A)}(X,GI) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{D(\mathcal A)}(X,\mathbf{R}GY)
    \end{aligned}
$$
{% endproof %}

## Composition and derivation

Now let's assume that we have additive functors between abelian 
categories $F_1: \mathcal A \to \mathcal B$ and $F_2: \mathcal B 
\to \mathcal C$. 

In general, 
$$
    \mathbf{R}F_1 \circ \mathbf{R}F_2 \not \cong \mathbf{R}(F_1 \circ F_2)
$$
and similarly for left derived functors. 

**Example**. Let's consider $k$ as a bimodule over $k[x]$ and look at the 
functor 
$$
    F := - \otimes_{k[x]} k : \operatorname{Mod} k[x] \to \operatorname{Mod} k[x]
$$  
If $\mathbf{L}F \circ \mathbf{L}F \cong \mathbf{L} F^2$, we would have 
$$
    M \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_{k[x]} \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_{k[x]} k 
    \cong M \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_{k[x]} k \otimes_{k[x]} k
$$
In particular, if we took $M = R$, then we would need
$$
    k \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_{k[x]} k \cong k \otimes_{k[x]} k
$$
which is problematic since 
$$
    H^{-1}( k \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_{k[x]} k ) = k. 
$$

However, there are some situations where the composition of derived 
functors is equal to the derived functor of the composition. 

**Proposition**. Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives $I$ for 
which $F_1I$ is adapted to $F_2$. Then the natural map 
$$
    \mathbf{R}F_1 \circ \mathbf{R}F_2 \to \mathbf{R}(F_1 \circ F_2)
$$
is a quasi-isomorphism.

{% proof %}
We can compute $\mathbf{R}F_2$ applied to $\mathbf{R}F_1 X$ using 
$\mathbf{R}F_1 X$ itself since applying $F_2$ to complexes of 
adapted objects preserves quasi-isomorphisms. 
{% endproof %}

## Morita equivalence

We now turn to studying the following question. To shorten notation 
we write
$$
    D(R) := D(\operatorname{Mod} R)
$$
for $R$ a ring. 

**Question**. Assume 
$$
    D(R) \cong D(S).
$$
How do $R$ and $S$ compare? 

The naive guess is that $R$ and $S$ are isomorphic. This is not true 
but also not terribly far off. 

Before we head to an equivalence of derived categories, we should 
note that 
$$
    \operatorname{Mod} R \cong \operatorname{Mod} S
$$
does not imply $R \cong S$ in general. 

**Definition**. Two rings $R$ and $S$ are called _Morita equivalent_ if 
there is an equivalence of categories of module categories.
$$
    \operatorname{Mod} R \cong \operatorname{Mod} S
$$

The name comes a 
[paper](https://tsukuba.repo.nii.ac.jp/record/20226/file_preview/Duality%20for%20modules%20and%20its%20applications%20to%20the%20theory%20of%20rings%20with%20minimum%20condition.pdf) 
of Kiiti Morita which gives a characterization such equivalences.

**Theorem**. $R$ and $S$ are Morita equivalent if and only if there exists 
an $R$-$S$ bimodule $U$ for which 
$$
    - \otimes_R U : \operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Mod} S
$$
is an equivalence. 

You can extract properties which are equivalent to $U$ furnishing an 
equivalence but we will not elaborate here as we will be focused on 
derived Morita equivalence [next]({% link notes/2021_10_05.md %}). 

What we will provide the following counter-example to the naive 
expectation. From reading the proof, you can tease out some 
of these condition, though. 

**Proposition**. Let $R$ be a commutative ring and let 
$$
    M_n(R) := \operatorname{End}_R(R^{\oplus n})
$$
for some $n > 0$. Then, $R$ and $M_n(R)$ are Morita equivalent. 

Let $U := R^{\oplus n}$. Consider the functor 
$$
    - \otimes_R U : \operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Mod} M_n(R)
$$

This comes with a right adjoint
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,-): \operatorname{Mod} M_n(R) \to \operatorname{Mod} R
$$

We consider the full subcategories $\mathcal C$ where the unit 
$$
    \eta : M \to \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,M \otimes_R U) 
$$
is an isomorphism and $\mathcal D$ where the counit 
$$
    \epsilon : \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,N) \otimes_R U \to N
$$
is an isomorphism. 

We will prove the proposition be establishing a few properties of $\mathcal C$ 
and $\mathcal D$ which will then imply
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \mathcal C & \cong \operatorname{Mod} R \\
        \mathcal D & \cong \operatorname{Mod} M_n(R) 
    \end{aligned}
$$

**Lemma**. The homomorphism 
$$
    \begin{aligned} 
        R & \to \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,U) \\
        r & \mapsto r \cdot 1_U
    \end{aligned} 
$$
is an isomorphism. 

{% proof %}
Let $\phi: U \to U$ be a $M_n(R)$-module morphism. Then we have 
a commutative diagram 
{% eqn mat_morphism %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    U \ar[r,"\phi"] \ar[d,"A"] & U \ar[d,"A"] \\
    U \ar[r,"\phi"] & U
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
for any $A \in M_n(R)$. Fix a basis $e_1,\ldots,e_n$ for 
$R^{\oplus n}$. 

We take $E_{ij}$ 
$$
    E_{ij}(e_l) := \begin{cases} e_j & l = i \\ 0 & \text{else} \end{cases}
$$
Then, 
$$
    \phi \circ E_{ij}(e_i) = \phi(e_j) = \sum \phi_{jl} e_l
$$
while 
$$
    E_{ij} \circ \phi(e_i) = \phi_{ij} e_j 
$$  
Thus, $\phi$ is a represented by a diagonal matrix: $\phi(e_i) = \phi_{ii} e_i$ for 
each $i$. And $\phi_{jj} e_j = \phi_{ii} e_j$ so $\phi$ is an $R$ multiple of 
the identity map. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. $R \in \mathcal C$ and $M_n(R) \in \mathcal D$. 

{% proof %}

We need to check that the map 
$$
    \begin{aligned} 
        R & \to \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, R \otimes_R U) \\
        r & \mapsto r \cdot 1_U
    \end{aligned} 
$$
is an isomorphism as is 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,U) \otimes_R U & \to U \\
        \phi \otimes u & \mapsto \phi(u) 
    \end{aligned}
$$

For the first map, via the natural isomorphism $R \otimes_R U \cong U$, 
we reduce to the previous lemma. The previous lemma also gives the second. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. The natural map
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U,N_i) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i) 
$$
is an isomorphism for any $N_a, a \in A$. 

{% proof %}
Note that 
$$
    M_n(R) \cong U^{\oplus n}
$$
in $\operatorname{Mod} M_n(R)$. Thus, $U$ is a retract of $M_n(R)$ 
and the natural map 
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(M_n(R),N_i) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(M_n(R), \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i) 
$$
is an isomorphism. Thus, it is also for $U$. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. Assume that $M_i \in \mathcal C$ for $i \in I$ 
then $\bigoplus_{i \in I} M_i \in \mathcal C$. 

Similarly, if $N_i \in \mathcal D$ for $i \in I$, 
then $\bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i \in \mathcal D$.

{% proof %}
We have to check that 
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} M_i \to \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, \bigoplus_{i \in I} M_i \otimes_R U)
$$
is an isomorphism. For each each $i$ we have isomorphisms 
$$
    M_i \to \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, M_i \otimes_R U)
$$
Taking direct sums gives an isomorphism
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} M_i \to \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, M_i \otimes_R U)
$$
The original map is the composition of this with the map
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, M_i \otimes_R U) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{M_n(R)}(U, \bigoplus_{i \in I} M_i \otimes_R U)
$$
The final map is an isomorphism from the previous lemma. 

Checking the other statement is analogous. 
{% endproof %}

One final property. 

**Lemma**. Assume we have an exact sequence 
$$
    F^{-1} \to F^0 \to M \to 0
$$
with $F^i \in \mathcal C$. Then $M \in \mathcal C$. 

Similarly, if we have an exact sequence 
$$
    G^{-1} \to G^0 \to N \to 0
$$
with $G^i \in \mathcal D$, then $N \in \mathcal D$. 

{% proof %}
Since $U$ is projective both as an $R$-module and as an $M_n(R)$-module, we know 
that $- \otimes_R$ and $\operatorname{Hom}(U,-)$ are exact. Thus we have a 
commutative diagram 
{% eqn right_exact %}
\begin{tikzcd}
F^{-1} \ar[r] \ar[d] & F^0 \ar[r] \ar[d] & M \ar[r] \ar[d] & 0 \\
\operatorname{Hom}(U,F^{-1}\otimes_R U) \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(U,F^0 \otimes_R U) \ar[r] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(U, M \otimes_R U) \ar[r] & 0
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
with exact rows and where the left two vertical maps are isomorphisms. The 
final vertical map is then also an isomorphism.

Again, the other statement is analogous. 
{% endproof %}

We can now give the proof the proposition. 

{% proof %}
The full subcategory $\mathcal C \subseteq \operatorname{Mod} R$
- contains $R$
- is closed under all coproducts and 
- is closed under cokernels. 

Since any module admits a presentation 
$$
    R^{\oplus I_1} \to R^{\oplus I_0} \to M \to 0
$$
we see that all modules are in $\mathcal C$. 

The same argument shows that $\mathcal D = \operatorname{Mod} M_n(R)$. 
{% endproof %}