---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-14
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Towards the derived category

We want to build a category where given a free resolution
$$
    \cdots F^{-2} \to F^{-1} \to F^0 \to M \to 0
$$
the module $M$ and the complex $F^\bullet$ are identified. 

We write $Ch(\mathcal A)$ for the category of chain complexes of 
objects of an additive category $\mathcal A$. The objects are 
chain complexes and the morphisms are chain maps. There are some common 
variants which impose vanishing conditions:
- $Ch^-(\mathcal A)$ is the category of chain complexes $C$ such there 
exists an $N$ with $C^i = 0$ for $i > N$. This is the category of 
_bounded above_ chain complexes. 
- $Ch^+(\mathcal A)$ is the category of chain complexes $C$ such there 
exists an $M$ with $C^i = 0$ for $i < M$. This is the category of 
_bounded below_ chain complexes. 
- $Ch^b(\mathcal A)$ has objects in the intersection of the previous 
two. It is the category of _bounded_ chain complexes.

We have a functor 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \mathcal A & \to Ch(\mathcal A) \\
        A & \mapsto A[0]
    \end{aligned}
$$
where 
$$
    (A[0])^j = \begin{cases} A & j = 0 \\ 0 & j \neq 0 \end{cases}
$$

The category of chain complexes also has built in family of 
auto-equivalences
$$
    [i] : Ch(\mathcal A) \to Ch(\mathcal A) 
$$
for $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. The functor $[i]$ is shifts (or translates) 
a complex $i$ steps to the left
$$
    A[i]^j = A^{i+j}
$$
and also translates the differential up to sign 
$$
    \delta_{A[i]}^j = (-1)^i \delta_A^{i+j}
$$

## Quasi-isomorphisms 

For a map of chain complexes $\phi: C \to D$, since $\delta_D^i \phi^i = \phi^{i+1} \delta_C^i$, 
we have well-defined maps 
$$
    \phi^i: \ker \delta_C^i \to \ker \delta_D^i \\
    \phi^i: \operatorname{im} \delta_C^i \to \operatorname{im} \delta_D^i
$$
and hence an induced map 
$$
    H^i(\phi) : H^i(C) \to H^i(D) 
$$
between the homologies. 

**Definition**. A _quasi-isomorphism_ is a chain map $\phi : C \to D$ such that
$$
    H^i(\phi) : H^i(C) \to H^i(D) 
$$
is an isomorphism for all $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

For an example of a quasi-isomorphism, we come back to our free resolution $F \to M$ from 
above. We can "kink" our complex 
<center>
{% tikz free_res_to_qism %}
    \node (NLL) at (-4,-2) {$\cdots$};
    \node (02) at (-2,-2) {$0$};
    \node (M) at (0,-2) {$M$};
    \node (03) at (2,-2) {$0$};
    \node (NLR) at (4,-2) {$\cdots$};
    \node (NUR) at (4,0) {$\cdots$};
    \node (04) at (2,0) {$0$};
    \node (F0) at (0,0) {$F^0$};
    \node (F1) at (-2,0) {$F^{-1}$};
    \node (NUL) at (-4,0) {$\cdots$};
    \draw[->] (NLL) -- (02);
    \draw[->] (02) -- (M);
    \draw[->] (M) -- (03);
    \draw[->] (03) -- (NLR);
    \draw[->] (NUL) -- (F1);
    \draw[->] (F1) -- (F0);
    \draw[->] (F0) -- (04);
    \draw[->] (04) -- (NUR); 
    \draw[->] (F1) -- (02);
    \draw[->] (F0) -- (M);
    \draw[->] (04) -- (03);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
and get a map of complexes. Since 
$$
    \cdots F^{-2} \to F^{-1} \to F^0 \to M \to 0
$$
is exact, we know that 
$$
    H^i(F) = \begin{cases} M & i = 0 \\ 0 & i \neq 0 \end{cases}
$$
and moreover the induced map 
$$
    H^0(F) \to H^0(M)
$$
is an isomorphism. 

This is the prototypical example of a quasi-isomorphism. 

## Derived category 

Our goal is the produce a category where quasi-isomorphims are inverted 
(in a controlled fashion). 

Note that this is necessary. 

**Example**. The map of complexes 
<center>
{% tikz noninvertible_qism %}
    \node (00) at (-4,2) {$\cdots$};
    \node (01) at (-2,2) {$0$};
    \node (02) at (0,2) {$k[x]$};
    \node (03) at (2,2) {$k[x]$};
    \node (04) at (4,2) {$0$};
    \node (05) at (6,2) {$\cdots$};
    \node (10) at (-4,0) {$\cdots$};
    \node (11) at (-2,0) {$0$};
    \node (12) at (0,0) {$0$};
    \node (13) at (2,0) {$k[x]/(x)$};
    \node (14) at (4,0) {$0$};
    \node (15) at (6,0) {$\cdots$};
    \draw[->] (01) -- (11);
    \draw[->] (02) -- (12);
    \draw[->] (03) -- (13);
    \draw[->] (04) -- (14);
    \draw[->] (00) -- (01);
    \draw[->] (01) -- (02);
    \draw[->] (02) -- node[above] {$x$} (03);
    \draw[->] (03) -- (04);
    \draw[->] (04) -- (05);
    \draw[->] (10) -- (11);
    \draw[->] (11) -- (12);
    \draw[->] (12) -- (13);
    \draw[->] (13) -- (14);
    \draw[->] (14) -- (15);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
has no inverse since any map $k[x]/(x) \to k[x]$ is necessarily $0$. 

**Definition**. The _derived category_ of $\mathcal A$, denoted 
$D(\mathcal A)$, for which there exists a functor 
$$
    Q : Ch(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal A)
$$
such that for any quasi-isomorphism $f: C \to D$ $Q(f)$ is an isomorphism 
and whenever we have a functor $F: Ch(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal D$ which 
also takes quasi-isomorphisms to isomorphisms there exists a unique 
$\bar{F}: D(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal D$ and a diagram 
<center>
{% tikz derived_category_property %}
    \node (CA) at (-2,0) {$Ch(\mathcal A)$};
    \node (D) at (1,-1) {$\mathcal D$};
    \node (DA) at (-2,-2) {$D(\mathcal A)$};
    \draw[->] (CA) -- node[above right] {$F$} (D);
    \draw[->] (CA) -- node[left] {$Q$} (DA);
    \draw[->] (DA) -- node[below right] {$\bar{F}$} (D);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
which commutes up to natural isomorphism. 

There is a general localization result that produces the category, 
ignoring set-theoretic issues. But the resulting category is difficult 
to wield. 

To give a construction of $D(\mathcal A)$ in some special, but 
sufficiently universal for us, we will work in two stages. 

1. Perform a well-behaved quotient of $Ch(\mathcal A)$ to obtain a new 
category $K(\mathcal A)$.

2. Identify a full subcategory of $\mathcal C \subset K(\mathcal A)$ 
where: 
    - every object of $K(\mathcal A)$ is quasi-isomorphic to one in 
    $\mathcal C$ and 
    - for any object $C$ of $\mathcal C$, the functor $\operatorname{Hom}(C,-)$ 
    (or $\operatorname{Hom}(-,C)$) converts quasi-isomorphisms for isomorphisms.

We start with making $K(\mathcal A)$. 

## The homotopy category of chain complexes

The essential complication of managing quasi-isomorphisms is that being a 
quasi-isomorphism is not a functorial notion. It cannot be expressed via 
some diagram. 

We introduce a related notion that is functorial: homotopy. 

**Definition**. A _homotopy_ $h$ between two chain maps $f,g: C \to D$ is a 
collection of maps in $\mathcal A$ 
$$
    h^i : C^i \to D^{i-1}
$$
satisfying 
$$
    f^i - g^i = h^{i+1} \delta^i_C + \delta_D^{i-1} h^i
$$ 
for all $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. We say $f$ and $g$ are _homotopic_. A morphism 
is _null-homotopic_ if it is homotopic to $0$. A chain complex $C$ is 
null-homotopic if $1_C$ is null-homotopic. 

You can visualize the homotopy identities as saying the sum of thick paths 
in the diagram
<center>
{% tikz homotopy_diagram %}
    \node (01) at (-2,2) {$C^{i-1}$};
    \node (02) at (0,2) {$C^i$};
    \node (03) at (2,2) {$C^{i+1}$};
    \node (11) at (-2,0) {$D^{i-1}$};
    \node (12) at (0,0) {$D^i$};
    \node (13) at (2,0) {$D^{i+1}$};
    \draw[->] (01) -- (11);
    \draw[->] (02) -- node[right] {$f,g$}(12);
    \draw[->] (03) -- (13);
    \draw[->] (01) -- (02);
    \draw[->,ultra thick] (02) -- (03);
    \draw[->,ultra thick] (11) -- (12);
    \draw[->] (12) -- (13);
    \draw[->,ultra thick] (03) -- node[below right] {$h^{i+1}$} (12);
    \draw[->,ultra thick] (02) -- node[below right] {$h^{i}$} (11);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
equals $f^i-g^i$. 

**Lemma**. Homotopy is an equivalence relation. Moreover, it is a two-sided 
ideal. 

{% proof %}
For reflexivity, we can take $h^i = 0$. For symmetry, we can replace $h^i$ by $-h^i$. 
For transitivity, we can add the homotopies. 

For the ideal condition, if $f$ and $g$ are homotopic via homotopy and $u$ is a chain map 
then $u \circ h$ is a homotopy between $u \circ f$ and $u \circ g$. 

Similarly, $h \circ u$ is a homotopy between $f \circ u$ and $g \circ u$. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma**. Homotopic maps induce equal maps on homology. 

{% proof %}
If 
$$
    f^i - g^i = h^{i+1} \delta^i_C + \delta_D^{i-1} h^i
$$
and $\delta^i_C c = 0$ then, 
$$
    f^i(c) - g^i(c) = \delta_D^{i-1} h^i(c)
$$
meaning that 
$$
    \overline{f^i(c)} = \overline{g^i(c)} \in H^i(D). 
$$
{% endproof %}

As a corollary null-homotopic complexes are _acyclic_, $H^i(C) = 0$ for all $i$. 

**Definition**. The _homotopy category_ $K(\mathcal A)$ has the same objects as 
$Ch(\mathcal A)$ but the morphism spaces are 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(C,D) := \operatorname{Hom}_{Ch(\mathcal A)}(C,D)/\text{homotopy}
$$

This is well-defined and comes with quotient functor $\pi : Ch(\mathcal A) \to K(\mathcal A)$ 
which is the identity on the objects and the quotient by the submodule of null-homotopic on 
morphism spaces. 

There is useful enhancement of the morphism spaces we can consider. For two complexes 
$C$ and $D$, let 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}^l(C,D) := \prod_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(C^i,D^{i+l})
$$
Equip these abelian groups with the structure of chain complex where 
$$
    (\delta \phi)^j := \delta_D^{j+l} \phi^j - (-1)^l \phi^{j+1} \delta_C^j
$$
for $\phi \in \operatorname{Hom}^l(C,D)$. 

**Lemma**. There are natural isomorphisms
$$
    H^l(\operatorname{Hom}^\bullet(C,D)) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_{K(\mathcal A)}(C,D[l]).
$$

{% proof %}
First note that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}^l(C,D) = \operatorname{Hom}^0(C,D)
$$
so we can reduce to $l = 0$. 

For $\phi \in \operatorname{Hom}^0(C,D)$, $\delta \phi = 0$ is the same as 
$$
    \delta_D^{j} \phi^j = \phi^{j+1} \delta_C^j
$$
which means $\phi$ is a chain map. 

For $\phi \in \operatorname{Hom}^{-1}(C,D)$, 
$$
    (\delta \phi)^j = \delta_D^{j-1} \phi^j + \phi^{j+1} \delta_C^j
$$
is saying that $\delta \phi$ is null-homotopic with homotopy $\phi$. 
{% endproof %}