---
layout: page
title: 2021-12-02
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Projective spaces as schemes

The primary example of a non-affine scheme is 
a projective space. We will describe the scheme 
and in the process obtain an understanding of its 
category of quasi-coherent sheaves. 

We start in general with a ($\mathbb{Z}$-) 
_graded ring_. 

**Definition**. A ring $R$ is $\mathbb{Z}$-_graded_ 
if there is a decomposition of $R$ 
$$
R = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}}^{\infty} R_i
$$
as an abelian group such that 
$$
R_i R_j \subseteq R_{i+j}
$$
$R_i$ is called the i-th graded piece of $R$. An 
element $r \in R_i$ is _homogeneous of degree i_. 

We will often be concerned with case that $R_i = 0$ 
for $i > 0$. Here we will say that $R$ is 
$\mathbb{N}$-graded. In the $\mathbb{N}$-graded case, 
we have a canonical maximal ideal 
$$
R_+ := \bigoplus_{i > 0} R_i
$$
Often $R_+$ is called the _irrelevant ideal_. 

The primary example of a graded ring is the polynomial ring 
$k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ where we grade each $x_i$ 
as $a_i$ for some choice and extend multiplicatively.

The _standard grading_ is $a_i = 1$ for each $i$. 

A graded $R$-module $M$ is an $R$-module with 
$$
M = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} M_i
$$
such that 
$$
R_i M_j \subseteq M_{i+j}
$$

An ideal $I$ is _homogeneous_ if 
$$
I = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} I \cap R_i 
$$
is a graded module. 

**Definition**. Let $R$ be a $\mathbb{N}$-graded 
ring. Then 
$$
\operatorname{Proj} R := 
\lbrace \mathfrak p \not \supseteq R_+ \mid 
\mathfrak{p} \text{ is homogenous and prime} \rbrace 
$$
with the topology whose closed subsets are $V(J)$ 
for homogeneous $J$. 

**Example**. For $R = k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ with the standard 
grading we write 
$$
\mathbb{P}_k^n := \operatorname{Proj} R 
$$
and call it n-dimensional _projective space_. 

For homogeneous elements $a \in R$, we have the 
corresponding principal opens $U_a$. 

Pick element $a \in R_i$ with $i > 0$. Then, we 
get a function 
$$
\begin{aligned}
U_a & \to \operatorname{Spec} (R_a)_0 \\
\mathfrak p & \mapsto (\mathfrak p R_a)_0 
\end{aligned}
$$

**Lemma**. This is well-defined and a homeomorphism. 

We equip $\operatorname{Proj} R$ with the sheaf of rings 
determined by 
$$
\mathcal O(U_a) := (R_a)_0 
$$
for positive degree $a$, plus restriction agreeing with 
localization as before. 

Given this, we see $\operatorname{Proj} R$ is a scheme. 

**Example**. Let's look at $\mathbb{P}_k^n$. 
Then, we have the principal opens corresponding to the 
monomials $x_i$. There 
$$
k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]_{x_i} = k[x_0,\ldots,x_i^{\pm 1}, \ldots, x_n]
$$
To get degree zero elements, we need a rational function 
$f/x_i^d$ where $f$ has degree $d$. Dividing through by $x_i$, 
we get 
$$
f/x_i^d \in k[x_0/x_i,\ldots,x_n/x_i]
$$
Thus, 
$$
U_{x_i} \cong \mathbb{A}^n_k 
$$

Looking at the overlap 
$$
U_{x_i} \cap U_{x_j} = U_{x_ix_j}
$$
we have the inclusions of graded rings 
$$
k[x_0,\ldots,x_i^{\pm 1},\ldots,x_n] \subset 
k[x_0,\ldots,x_i^{\pm 1},\ldots,x_j^{\pm 1},\ldots,x_n] \supset 
k[x_0,\ldots,x_j^{\pm 1},\ldots,x_n]
$$

Let's write $y_l = x_l/x_i$ and $z_l = x_l/x_j$. Then, we 
have 
$$
y_j z_i = 1
$$
We have 
$$
U_{x_i} \cong \operatorname{Spec} k[y_0,\ldots,\hat{y_i},\ldots,y_n]
$$
and 
$$
U_{x_j} \cong \operatorname{Spec} k[z_0,\ldots,\hat{z_j},\ldots,z_n]
$$
In the first set of coordinates, 
$$
U_{x_i} \cap U_{x_j} \cong
\operatorname{Spec} k[y_0,\ldots,\hat{y_i},\ldots,y_n]_{y_j}
$$
while in the second 
$$
U_{x_i} \cap U_{x_j} \cong
\operatorname{Spec} k[z_0,\ldots,\hat{z_j},\ldots,z_n]_{z_i}
$$
Changing from one set of coordinates to another is an isomorphism 
on $U_{x_i} \cap U_{x_j}$ which can be described explicitly by 
$$
y_l z_i = z_l
$$

One can extract these charts and their overlap maps as _gluing 
data_ for the scheme $\mathbb{P}_k^n$. We won't talk about this 
in general but it is another useful way to think of schemes - 
as glued from affine schemes.

Let's note that $\mathbb{P}_k^n$ cannot be an affine scheme. 
Suppose we have $s \in \Gamma(\mathbb{P}^k,\mathcal O)$.
Then, we get 
$$
s|_{U_{x_i}} \in k[x_0/x_i,\ldots,x_n/x_i]
$$
for each $i$. Thus, 
$$
s \in \bigcap_{i=0}^n k[x_0/x_i,\ldots,x_n/x_i] = k 
$$
We know that if $X$ is affine then 
$$
X \cong \operatorname{Spec}(\Gamma(X,\mathcal O))
$$
It is clear that 
$$
\mathbb{P}_k^n \neq \operatorname{Spec} k 
$$
for $n > 0$. (We have a lot more points.) 


### Quasi-coherent sheaves and graded modules

Next, for a graded $R$-module $M$, we get a quasi-coherent 
sheaf $\widetilde{M}$ by 
$$
\widetilde{M}(U_a) := (M_a)_0
$$

This produces an exact functor 
$$
\widetilde{(-)} : \operatorname{GrMod} R \to 
\operatorname{Qcoh} (\operatorname{Proj} R)
$$

The category of graded modules admits more operations than 
ungraded modules. In particular, we have grading _twists_
$$
M(i)_j = M_{i+j}
$$
analogous to shifts of complexes. 

We have defined 
$$
\mathcal O := \widetilde{R} 
$$
and we set 
$$
\mathcal O(i) := \widetilde{R(i)}
$$
for each $i \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

**Lemma**. The functor $\widetilde{(-)}$ commutates with 
forming tensor products:
$$
\widetilde{M \otimes_R N} \cong \widetilde{M} \otimes_{\mathcal O} 
\widetilde{N}
$$

**Definition**. Given a quasi-coherent sheaf $\mathcal F$ on 
$\operatorname{Proj} R$, its _i-th twist_ is 
$$
\mathcal F(i) := \mathcal F \otimes_{\mathcal O} \mathcal O(i)
$$

Combining twists with global sections gives us a way to 
produce a graded module from a quasi-coherent sheaf. 

Let 
$$
\tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, \mathcal F) := 
\bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} \Gamma(\operatorname{Proj} R, 
\mathcal F(i))
$$
**Lemma**. Evaluation at $1$ is an isomorphism 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal O}(\mathcal O, \mathcal F) 
\to \Gamma(X,\mathcal F)
$$

Thus we can view 
$$
\tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, \mathcal F) := 
\bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} 
\operatorname{Hom}(\mathcal O, \mathcal F (i))
$$
Using the isomorphism 
$$
\mathcal O(i) \otimes_{\mathcal O} \mathcal O(j) 
\cong \mathcal O(i+j) 
$$
$\tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, \mathcal O)$ 
acquires a natural ring structure. 

Moreover, given a $r \in R_i$, we get 
$$
r : R \to R(i)
$$
in $\operatorname{GrMod} R$. Applying 
$\widetilde{(-)}$ and then $\Gamma$ gives a 
map 
$$
R \to \tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, \mathcal O)
$$
which is homomorphism of graded rings. 

For each $\mathcal F$, 
$\tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, \mathcal F)$ 
naturally is a $\tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R, 
\mathcal O)$-module. Thus, is a graded $R$-module. 

**Proposition**. We have an adjunction 
$$
\widetilde{(-)} \vdash \tilde{\Gamma}(\operatorname{Proj} R,-)
$$

We will revisit this at the start of the next semester. 
But for now, let's note that this adjunction in general is 
not coming from an equivalence. 

**Example**. Let $R = k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ with its 
standard grading and take 
$$
k := k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]/(x_0,\ldots,x_n)
$$
as a graded module. Then 
$$
\widetilde{k}(U_{x_i}) = (k_{x_i})_0
$$
As $x_i$ acts by zero on $k$ and must be an isomorphism, we have
$$
(k_{x_i})_0 = 0
$$
for each $i$. Thus, 
$$
\widetilde{k} = 0 
$$
giving an nonzero object which is mapped to $0$. 

More generally, we say that $M$ is $R_+$-_torsion_ if for 
each $m \in M$ there is some $l > 0$ with 
$$
    (R_+)^l m = 0
$$
The full subcategory of $R_+$-torsion modules is denoted 
by $\operatorname{Tors}\_{R_+}(R)$ or simply 
$\operatorname{Tors}(R)$ if the context is clear. 

The same argument as in the example of $\mathbb{P}_k^n$ 
shows that 
$$
\widetilde{M} = 0 
$$
for any $M \in \operatorname{Tors}(R)$. 

In fact, we will see that $\operatorname{Qcoh}(X)$ is 
the quotient of $\operatorname{GrMod} R$ by the subcategory 
$\operatorname{Tors}(R)$.