---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-11
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Strong generation and ghosts 

The proof of Brown Representability is a powerful way to 
construct a "resolution" in a triangulated category. We wish 
to be able to run it successfully without the condition on 
the existence of coproducts. 

It turns out that a good substitute for compact generation is 
the notion of _strong generation_. To define this, we need some 
intermediate notions.

**Defintion**. Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of a triangulated 
category $\mathcal T$. We write $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$ for 
the smallest additive subcategory closed under shifts and containing 
the objects of $\mathcal S$. 

The smallest subcategory closed under retracts and containing 
$\mathcal S$ is denoted $\overline{\mathcal S}$. 

Given another subcategory $\mathcal S^\prime$, we write 
$\mathcal S \ast \mathcal S^\prime$ for the full subcategory 
consisting of objects $X$ of $\mathcal T$ for which there is 
triangle 
$$
	S \to X \to S^\prime \to S[1]
$$
with $S \in \mathcal S$ and $S^\prime \in \mathcal S^\prime$. 

For $n>1$, we set 
$$
\langle \mathcal S \rangle_n = \overline{\langle \mathcal S 
\rangle}_{n-1} \ast \overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_0
$$

We say that an object $G$ _strongly generates_ $\mathcal T$ if 
there is some $n$ with 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \mathcal T
$$

**Lemma**. The operation $\ast$ is associative. 

{% proof %}
This is a consequence of the Octahedral Axiom, TR4. We will 
omit the details. 
{% endproof %}

From this lemma we see that 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \overline{\underbrace{
{\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0 \ast \cdots \ast 
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0}}_n}
$$

We introduce another notion which we will see is related. 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of $\mathcal T$. 
We say that a map $f: X \to Y$ is _$\mathcal S$-ghost_ if 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(S,f) = 0
$$
for all objects of $\mathcal S$.

**Example**. Take $R$, a ring, as an object of $D(\operatorname{Mod} 
R)$. Then, a map $f: C \to D$ is $R$-ghost if and only if the induced map 
$$
H^0(f) : H^0(C) \to H^0(D)
$$
is zero. 

**Lemma**. If $X \to Y$ is ghost for all shifts of objects 
from $\mathcal S$, then it is $\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_0$
-ghost. 

{% proof %}
Note that 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}\left( \bigoplus S_i, f) = \bigoplus 
\operatorname{Hom}(S_i,f) 
$$
for finite sums.

If $T$ is retract of an object $S$ and $\operatorname{Hom}(S,f)=0$, 
then $\operatorname{Hom}(T,f)$ is a retract of $0$ and hence is 
$0$. 
{% endproof %}

**Lemma** (Ghost Lemma). Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of 
a triangulated category $\mathcal T$. If $f_{i+1}: X_i \to X_{i+1}$ 
is a sequence of $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghosts for 
$0 \leq i \leq n$, then the composition $f_n \circ \cdots \circ f_1$ 
is $\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_{n+1}$-ghost.

{% proof %}
We prove this via induction on $n$. The case of $n=0$ is clear. 

For the induction step, we must prove that if $f: X \to Y$ is 
$\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n$-ghost and $g: Y \to Z$ is 
$\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghost, then $gf$ is 
$\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_{n+1}$-ghost. 

In general, if a map $h$ is $\mathcal R$-ghost for some subcategory 
$\mathcal R$, then it is automatically $\overline{\mathcal R}$-ghost. 
So we reduce to checking $gf$ is $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_{n+1}$-
ghost. 

For an object $U$ from $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_{n+1}$, we have 
a triangle 
$$
W \to U \to S \to W[1]
$$
with $W \in \overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n$ and $S \in 
\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_0$. 

Given a map $U \to X$, the composition 
$$
	W \to U \to X \overset{f}{\to} Y
$$
vanishes as $f$ is $\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n$-ghost. 
Thus, there exists a $S \to Y$ 
{% eqn ghost_diagram %}
\begin{tikzcd}
W \ar[r] & U \ar[r] \ar[d] & S \ar[d] \\
& X \ar[r,"f"] & Y 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
making the diagram commute. But as $g: Y \to Z$ is 
$\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghost, the composition 
$$
	S \to Y \to Z
$$
is $0$. Thus, 
$$
	U \to X \overset{f}{\to} Y \overset{g}{\to} Z
$$
is also $0$, and so, $gf$ is $\overline{\langle \mathcal S 
\rangle}_{n+1}$-ghost. 
{% endproof %}

Note that $\mathcal S$-ghosts form an ideal in $\mathcal T$. 

**Corollary**. Assume that there is a subcategory $\mathcal S$ 
of $\mathcal T$ with 
$$
	\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n = \mathcal T 
$$
Then, the ideal of $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghosts is 
uniformly nilpotent with degree $n$. 

Finally, if we can produce $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$ 
approximations, then we have a converse to the previous corollary. 

**Lemma**. Suppose we have a subcategory $\mathcal S$ such 
that 
- the ideal of $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghosts is 
uniformly nilpotent of degree $n$ and 
- for any object $X$ of $\mathcal T$ there exists a 
triangle 
$$
	S \to X \to Y \to S[1]
$$
with $S \in \overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_0$ and 
$X \to Y$ $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghost.

Then, 
$$
	\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n = \mathcal T
$$

{% proof %}
Using induction, we can produce a sequence of ghosts 
$$
	X_0 = X \to X_1 \to \cdots \to X_{n-1} \to X_n 
$$
with 
$$
	\operatorname{cone}(X_i \to X_{i+1}) \in 
	\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0
$$
Let $Y$ be the cone over the composition $X \to X_n$. Then from TR4 
and the facts that each cone over $X_i \to X_{i+1}$ lies in 
$\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$, one sees that 
$$
	Y \in \langle \mathcal S \rangle_n
$$
As it is composition of $n$ ghosts, the map $X \to X_n$ is zero. Thus, 
$$
	Y \cong X_n \oplus X[1]
$$
So 
$$
	X \in \overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n 
$$

{% endproof %}
