---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-23
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Rapid tour through sheaves

Let $X$ be a topological space. We have a category 
$\operatorname{Opens}(X)$ whose objects are open subsets 
and 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(U,V) 
= 
\begin{cases} 
    U \to V & U \subseteq V \\ 
    \emptyset & U \not \subseteq V 
\end{cases}
$$

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal C$ be a category. A _pre-sheaf 
valued in $\mathcal C$_ $\mathcal F$ on $X$ is a 
functor 
$$
    \mathcal F : \operatorname{Opens}(X)^{op} \to \mathcal C
$$
A morphisms of pre-sheaves is a natural transformation of 
the functors. 

We can unpack this as follows:
- For every open $U$ we have an object $\mathcal F(U)$ of 
$\mathcal C$. We can this _sections_ of $\mathcal F$ 
over $U$ and will also write this as $\Gamma(U,\mathcal F)$. 
- If $U \subseteq V$, we have a morphism
$$
    r_{VU} : \mathcal F(V) \to \mathcal F(U) 
$$
with $r_{UU} = 1\_{\mathcal F(U)}$. We usually call 
this map _restriction_ from $V$ to $U$ and is also often 
denoted by 
$$
r_{VU}(s) = s|_U
$$
- If $U \subseteq V \subseteq W$, the diagram 
{% eqn presheaf_diagram %}
\begin{tikzcd}
\mathcal F(W) \ar[rr,"r_{WV}"] \ar[rd,"r_{WU}"] & & 
\mathcal F(V) \ar[ld,"r_{VU}"] \\
& \mathcal F(U) & 
\end{tikzcd} 
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

For a morphism $f : \mathcal F \to \mathcal G$ we have 
morphisms 
$$
    f(U) : \mathcal F(U) \to \mathcal G(U) 
$$
with the commutative diagrams 
{% eqn maps_presheaves %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 \mathcal F(V) \ar[r,"f(V)"] \ar[d] & \mathcal G(V) \ar[d] \\
 \mathcal F(U) \ar[r,"f(U)"] & \mathcal G(U)
\end{tikzcd}
for $U \subseteq V$.
{% endeqn %}

Generally, when we just say pre-sheaf without specifying the 
values, we will mean sets or abelian groups. 

**Examples**
- Take an object $C$ from $\mathcal C$, then we have the 
constant pre-sheaf $\underline{C}$
$$
\underline{C}(U) = C \\
r_{VU} = 1_C. 
$$

- Let $C_x$ be a set of objects of $\mathcal C$ indexed 
by $X$. We have the pre-sheaf 
$$
U \mapsto \prod_{x \in U} C_x
$$
where 
$$
r_{VU} : \prod_{x \in V} C_x \to \prod_{x \in U} C_x
$$
is the projection onto the components with $x \in U$. 

- We have the pre-sheaf of continuous functions 
$$
\mathcal O(U) = \lbrace f : X \to Y \mid f 
\text{ continuous} \rbrace
$$
with target $Y$. If $Y$ is a topological ring, then 
$\mathcal O$ is a pre-sheaf of rings. 

- Fix $x \in X$ and $C \in \mathcal C$. Assume 
that $\mathcal C$ has a terminal object $\ast$. Then we have 
$$
    i_{x \ast} \underline{C} (U) = 
    \begin{cases}
        C & x \in U \\
        \ast & x \not \in U. 
    \end{cases}
$$
This works, in particular, if $\mathcal C$ is an abelian category. 

**Definition**. A pre-sheaf $\mathcal F$ is a _sheaf_ if given an 
open cover $U_\alpha$ of $V$ and sections $s_\alpha \in 
\mathcal F(U_\alpha)$ satisfying 
$$
s_{\alpha}|_{U_\alpha \cap U_\beta} = s_{\beta}|_{U_\alpha \cap U_\beta}
$$
for all $\alpha, \beta$, there exists a unique $s \in 
\mathcal F(V)$ with 
$$
s|_{U_\alpha} = s_\alpha
$$
for all $\alpha$. 

Morphisms of sheaves are morphisms of the underlying pre-sheaves. 

We have a forgetful functor 
$$
    \operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C) \to \operatorname{PreSh}(X,\mathcal C)
$$
which often has a left adjoint. To give a (somewhat) explicit 
description, we need an auxiliary notion. 

**Definition**. Let $x \in X$ and $\mathcal F$ a pre-sheaf on $X$ 
with values in $\mathcal C$. Then the _stalk_ of $\mathcal F$ at 
$x$ is 
$$
\mathcal F_x = \operatorname{colim}_{x \in U} \mathcal F(U)
$$

In general, this need not exist. For common targets, like 
$\operatorname{Ab}$, this is not an issue. 

Assume that $\mathcal C$ has small colimits and limits. Let 
$$
    \widetilde{\mathcal F}(U) \subset \prod_{x \in U} \mathcal F_x
$$
where $(s_x)$ is a section of $\widetilde{\mathcal F}$ over $U$ 
if there exists 
a cover $V_\alpha$ of $U$ and sections $s_\alpha \in \mathcal 
F(V_\alpha)$ with 
$$
    (s_\alpha)_y = s_y 
$$
for all $y \in V_\alpha$. We call $\widetilde{F}$ the 
_sheafification_ of $\mathcal F$. 

**Proposition**. The assignment 
$$
\mathcal F \mapsto  \widetilde{\mathcal F}
$$
is a functor 
$$
\operatorname{PreSh}(X,\mathcal C) \to \operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C)
$$
which is left adjoint to the forgetful functor 
$$
\operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C) \to \operatorname{PreSh}(X,\mathcal C)
$$

{% proof %}
Note that 
$$
U \mapsto \prod_{x \in U} C_x 
$$
is a sheaf so we only need to check that the condition: 

"there exists 
a cover $V_\alpha$ of $U$ and sections $s_\alpha \in \mathcal 
F(V_\alpha)$ with 
$$
    (s_\alpha)_y = s_y 
$$
for all $y \in V_\alpha$"

cuts out a subsheaf. We leave the reader to convince themselves 
of this. 

Next, one checks that if $\mathcal G$ is a sheaf then any map 
$\phi: \mathcal F \to \mathcal G$ admits a unique factorization 
{% eqn presheaf_mapsto_sheaf %}
\begin{tikzcd}
\mathcal F \ar[rr,"\phi"] \ar[rd] & & \mathcal G \\
& \widetilde{\mathcal F} \ar[ur] &
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
{% endproof %}

Assume that $\mathcal A$ is an abelian category and 
sheafification exists. Then we have a 
an abelian category structure on $\operatorname{PreSh}(X,\mathcal A)$
where 
$$
0 \to \mathcal F \to \mathcal G \to \mathcal H \to 0
$$
if exact if each 
$$
0 \to \mathcal F(U) \to \mathcal G(U) \to \mathcal H(U) \to 0
$$
is exact. 

Given a map $\phi : \mathcal F \to \mathcal G$, then $\ker \phi$ is 
a sheaf in general but $\operatorname{cok} \phi$ is not. 

We transfer the abelian category structure to 
$\operatorname{Sh}(X, \mathcal A)$ using sheafification. Precisely, in
$\operatorname{Sh}(X, \mathcal A)$
$$
\operatorname{cok} \phi (U) := \widetilde{\operatorname{cok} \phi(U)}
$$

We lose exactness on open sets in general but still have a simple 
criteria for exactness in $\operatorname{Sh}(X, \mathcal A)$. 

**Proposition**. A sequence of sheaves 
$$
\mathcal F \to \mathcal G \to \mathcal H
$$
is exact if and only if for each $x \in X$ the sequence of stalks
$$
\mathcal F_x \to \mathcal G_x \to \mathcal H_x
$$
is exact. 

{% proof %}
We note that 
$$
\widetilde{\mathcal F}_x = \mathcal F_x
$$
for all $x \in X$. One checks that exactness reduces to this. We 
leave the details to the reader. 
{% endproof %}

If $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives then so does 
$\operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal A)$. For each $x \in X$, we choose 
some injection 
$$
\mathcal F_x \to \mathcal I(x)
$$
to get 
$$
\widetilde{F} \to \prod \mathcal F_x \to \prod \mathcal I(x)
$$
which still has no kernel. 

One then checks that 

**Lemma**. The sheaf $\prod \mathcal I(x)$ is injective in 
$\operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal A)$. 

As a consequence, we can define right derived functors. One of 
particular interest is global sections. 

The functor 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\Gamma(X,-) : \operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal A) & \to \mathcal A \\
\mathcal F & \mapsto \mathcal F(X)
\end{aligned}
$$
is left-exact but not right exact in general. 

**Definition**. The _i-th (sheaf) cohomology_ of $\mathcal F$ is 
the i-th right derived functor of global sections 
$$
H^i(X,\mathcal F) := \mathbf{R}^i\Gamma(X,\mathcal F)
$$

One very useful computational tool is the following. 

**Proposition**. Assume we have an exact sequence of sheaves 
$$
0 \to \mathcal F \to \mathcal G \to \mathcal H \to 0
$$
then we get a long exact sequence of cohomologies 
$$
0 \to H^0(X,\mathcal F) \to H^0(X,\mathcal G) \to H^0(X,\mathcal H) \to 
H^1(X,\mathcal F) \to \cdots 
$$

{% proof %}
We have seen that right derived functors are homological and we know that 
$$
0 \to \mathcal F \to \mathcal G \to \mathcal H \to 0
$$
provides a triangle in $D(\operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal A))$. 
{% endproof %}

Global sections is special case of a more general functor between 
categories of sheaves coming from continuous maps of topological spaces. 

**Definition**. Given a continuous map $f: X \to Y$, we have the 
_pushforward_ 
$$
f_\ast : \operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C) \to 
\operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C) 
$$
where 
$$
f_\ast \mathcal F(U) := F(f^{-1}U)
$$

Note that for the map $f: X \to \ast$ to the one-point 
space we have 
$$
f_\ast \mathcal F(\ast) = \Gamma(X,\mathcal F)
$$
So the derived pushforward $\mathbf{R}f_\ast$ is generalization 
of cohomology which can be heuristically viewed as 
"cohomology along the fibers of $f$".  

**Definition**. Given a sheaf $\mathcal G$ on $Y$, we also have the pre-sheaf 
on $X$
$$
U \mapsto \operatorname{colim}_{f(U) \subseteq V} 
\mathcal G(V)
$$
The _inverse image sheaf under $f$_ $f^{-1}\mathcal G$ is 
the sheafification of this pre-sheaf. 

**Proposition**. We have an adjunction $f^{-1} \vdash f_\ast$. 