---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-26
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Semi-orthogonal decompositions and upper triangular algebras

There is a standard way to break a triangulated category in 
(hopefully simpler) pieces. 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal T$ be a triangulated category. 
A _semi-orthogonal decomposition_ or _SOD_ is pair of 
full triangulated subcategories $\mathcal A, \mathcal B$ of 
$\mathcal T$ such that 
- $\mathcal A \subset \mathcal B^{\perp}$, ie 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,A) = 0 
$$
for any $A \in \mathcal A$ and $B \in \mathcal B$. 
- for any $X \in \mathcal T$ there exists a triangle 
$$
    B \to X \to A \to B[1]
$$
with $A \in \mathcal A$ and $B \in \mathcal B$. 

We write 
$$
    \mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle
$$
to denote an SOD. 

The mental picture of a SOD is an upper triangular matrix. 

**Example**. Let $A$ and $B$ be dg-algebras and let $P$ be 
an $A$-$B$ bimodule. We form a new dg-algebra $U$ whose elements 
are represented as 
$$
    \begin{pmatrix} 
        a & p \\
        0 & b 
    \end{pmatrix}
$$
since multiplication is given by what you would expect from the 
notation
$$
    \begin{pmatrix} 
        a_1 & p_1 \\
        0 & b_1 
    \end{pmatrix}
    \begin{pmatrix} 
        a_2 & p_2 \\
        0 & b_2 
    \end{pmatrix} = 
    \begin{pmatrix} 
        a_1a_2 & a_1p_2 + p_1b_2 \\
        0 & b_1b_2 
    \end{pmatrix}
$$
Let $M$ be a $U$ dg-module. We have an inclusion of 
$$
    A \times B \to U
$$
so each $M$ has the structure of a $A \times B$ dg-module. We 
can take that two idempotents 
$$
    e_A := (1,0) \in A \times B \\
    e_B := (0,1) \in A \times B 
$$
and set 
$$
    M_A := e_A M \\
    M_B := e_B M 
$$
We have $M = M_A \oplus M_B$. Each $p \in K$ induces a $k$-linear 
map 
$$
    p : M \to M 
$$
As $pe_A = 0$ and $e_Bp = 0$, we see that the only nonzero component 
in the decomposition $M = M_A \oplus M_B$ is the map 
$$
    p : M_B \to M_A. 
$$
From the algebra structure we see that 
- $P \otimes_k M_B \to M_A$ descends to a map 
$$
    \psi_M: P \otimes_B M_B \to M_A
$$
and 
- the map 
$$
    \psi_M: P \otimes_B M_B \to M_A
$$
is a homomorphism of $A$ dg-modules. 

A morphism of $U$ dg-modules $f : M \to N$ gives a pair 
$f_A : M_A \to N_A$ an $A$-linear map and $f_B : M_B \to N_B$ a 
$B$-linear map such that the diagram 
{% eqn sod_upper_triangular %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 P \otimes_B M_B \ar[d,"1 \otimes f_B"] \ar[r,"\psi_M"] & M_A \ar[d,"f_A"] \\
 P \otimes_B N_B \ar[r,"\psi_N"] & N_A 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

From the data of $(M,N,\psi)$ we can recover the structure of 
a $U$ dg-module on $M := M \oplus M^\prime$. Thus, we have an equivalence 
between $\operatorname{Mod} U$ and the category of triples $(M,N,\psi)$ 
with morphisms being pairs $(f,g)$ which make 
{% eqn sod_upper_triangular_2 %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 P \otimes_B N \ar[d,"1 \otimes g"] \ar[r,"\psi"] & M \ar[d,"f"] \\
 P \otimes_B N^\prime \ar[r,"\psi^\prime"] & M^\prime 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commute. 

Any $A$-module $M$ determines a $U$-module with $(M,0,0)$. Similarly, 
Any $B$-module $N$ determines a $U$-module with $(0,N,0)$. These given 
fully-faithful functors 
$$
    \imath_A : \operatorname{Mod} A \to \operatorname{Mod} U \\
    \imath_B : \operatorname{Mod} B \to \operatorname{Mod} U
$$
Moreover, we have natural isomorphisms 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_U(\imath_A M, N) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_A(M,N_A)
$$
and 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_U(M,\imath_B N) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_B(M_B,N)
$$
Thus, 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \rho_A : \operatorname{Mod} U & \to \operatorname{Mod} A \\
        M & \mapsto M_A 
    \end{aligned}
$$
is right adjoint to $\imath_A$ and 
$$
   \begin{aligned}
        \lambda_A : \operatorname{Mod} U & \to \operatorname{Mod} B \\
        M & \mapsto M_B 
    \end{aligned}
$$
is left adjoint to $\imath_B$. Since both $\rho_A$ and $\lambda_B$ preserve
acyclicity, we see that 

**Lemma**. For any K-projective $A$-module $Q$, the $U$-module 
$\imath_A Q$ is also K-projective. For any K-injective $B$-module $I$, 
the $U$-module $\imath_B I$ is also K-injective. 

**Corollary**. We have fully-faithful functors 
$$
    \imath_A : D(A) \to D(U) \\
    \imath_B : D(B) \to D(U)
$$
The images are triangulated subcategories of $D(U)$. 

We have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_D(U)(\imath_A M, \imath_B N) = 0 
$$
since 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(U)}(\imath_A M, \imath_B N) \cong 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(A)}(M, \rho_A \imath_B N) \cong 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(A)}(M, 0) = 0
$$

Finally, for any $M$ we have a the co-unit
$$
    \epsilon_M : \imath_A \rho_A M \to M 
$$
and the triangle 
$$
    \imath_A \rho_A M \to M \to C(\epsilon) \to \imath_A \rho_A M[1]
$$
Note that $\imath_A \rho_A M = M_A$ so we have a sequence 
$$
    0 \to M_A \to M \to M_B \to 0
$$
which is exact as graded $k$-modules. There is a natural map 
$$
    C(\epsilon) \to M_B 
$$
which is a quasi-isomorphism. Thus, $C(\epsilon)$ lies in $D(B)$ 
(up to isomorphism) and we have a semi-orthogonal decomposition. 

From considerations at the level of $\operatorname{Mod} U$, we might 
think this a completely orthogonal decomposition. However, that 
is rarely the case. To compute 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(U)}(\imath_B N, \imath_A M)
$$
in terms of homotopy classes we need to replace $\imath_B N$ by 
a K-projective resolution or $\imath_A M$ by a K-injective resolution. 
Since $\imath_B$ does not necessarily preserve K-projectivity, we 
cannot simply replace $N$ in $K(B)$ and apply $\imath_B$. Similarly, 
we cannot resolve $M$ by a K-injective in $K(A)$ and call it a day. 

Viewing $P$ as a functor 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \Phi_P : D(B) & \to D(A) \\
        N & \mapsto P \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_B N
    \end{aligned}
$$
we can think of $D(U)$ as gluing together a copy of $D(A)$ and 
$D(B)$ via $\Phi_P$. 

We will see this and the ideas that popped in the discussion of $D(U)$ 
appearing when we discuss [properties of semi-orthogonal decompositions 
in general]({% link notes/2021_10_28.md %}).