---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-28
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Properties of SODs

The triangle required in a SOD is actually functorial. 

**Lemma**. Let $\mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle$ be a SOD. 
Let $f : X \to X^\prime$ be a morphism in $\mathcal T$. There are unique morphisms 
$f_A : A \to A^\prime$ and $f_B : B \to B^\prime$ so that the diagram 
{% eqn functorial_triangle_sod %} 
\begin{tikzcd}
B \ar[r] \ar[d,"f_B"] & X \ar[r] \ar[d,"f"] & A \ar[d,"f_A"] \ar[r] & B[1] \ar[d,"{f_B[1]}"] \\
B^\prime \ar[r] & X^\prime \ar[r] & A^\prime \ar[r] & B^\prime[1]
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

{% proof %}
We have a long exact sequence 
$$
    \cdots \to \operatorname{Hom}(B,A^\prime[-1]) \to \operatorname{Hom}(B,B^\prime) \to 
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,X^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}(B,A^\prime) \to \cdots 
$$
with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,A^\prime[-1]) = \operatorname{Hom}(B,A^\prime) = 0
$$
so 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,B^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}(B,B^\prime)
$$
is an isomorphism giving $f_B$ from $B \to X \overset{f}{\to} X^\prime$. Using the axioms 
of a triangulated category we can produce one $f_A$ making the diagram commute. Since 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(A,A^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}(X,A^\prime)
$$
is also an isomorphism by similar considerations, we see that $f_A$ is unique. 
{% endproof %}

From this we see that $A$ and $B$ occurring in a triangle 
$$
    B \to X \to A \to B[1]
$$
depend on $X$ up to unique isomorphism. Thus, it makes sense to write $X_B$ and $X_A$ for 
(a choice of) them. 

**Corollary**. The assignment 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \lambda_A : \mathcal T & \to \mathcal A \\
        X & \mapsto X_A \\
        f & \mapsto f_A
    \end{aligned} 
$$
is a functor and left adjoint to $\imath_A : \mathcal A \to \mathcal T$.

The assignment 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \rho_B : \mathcal T & \to \mathcal B \\
        X & \mapsto X_B \\
        f & \mapsto f_B
    \end{aligned}
$$
is a functor and right adjoint to $\imath_B : \mathcal B \to \mathcal T$. 

{% proof %}
The previous lemma tells us that each are functors. For adjunction, we already 
saw that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,B^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}(B,X^\prime)
$$
and 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(A,A^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}(X,A^\prime)
$$
are isomorphisms.  
{% endproof %}

We have $\mathcal A \subset \mathcal B^{\perp}$ but more can be said. 

**Lemma**. We have 
$$
    \mathcal A = \mathcal B^{\perp}
$$
and 
$$
    \mathcal B = {}^{\perp} \mathcal A
$$

{% proof %}
Assume we have $X \in \mathcal T$ with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,X) = 0 
$$
for all $B \in \mathcal B$. We have the triangle 
$$
    B \to X \to A \to B[1]
$$
and the map $B \to X$ must be $0$. Therefore,
$$
    A \cong X \oplus B
$$
Now $B \in \mathcal B$ and is a summand of $\mathcal A$. 
Since $\mathcal A \subset \mathcal B^{\perp}$ and summand 
of $\mathcal A$ also lies in $\mathcal B^{\perp}$. Thus, 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(B,B) = 0
$$
and $B = 0$. So $X \in \mathcal A$. The argument for the 
other equivalence is similar. 
{% endproof %}

The previous results show that a single component in a SOD 
completely captures all information. We introduce some 
notation for this first. 

**Definition**. We say full triangulated subcategory is 
_left admissible_ if the inclusion admits a left adjoint. We 
say it is _right admissible_ if the inclusion admits a 
right adjoint. If it is both left and right admissible, we 
say it is _admissible_. 

**Proposition**. The following are equivalent:
- $\mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A, \mathcal B \rangle$
- $\mathcal A$ is left admissible. 
- $\mathcal B$ is right admissible.  

The previous proposition gives a bit more flexibility for verifying 
an SOD. 

**Example**. Let $R$ be commutative Noetherian ring and $I \leq R$ an ideal. 
We say that $M \in \operatorname{Mod} R$ is _$I$-torsion_ if for 
every $m \in M$ there exists $j > 0$ such that $I^jm = 0$. 

Inside $D(R)$, we have the full triangulated subcategory $D_I(R)$ 
consisting of all complexes $C$ with $H^\ast(C)$ $I$-torsion. 

The inclusion $D_I(R)$ admits a right adjoint 
$$
    M \mapsto \operatorname{colim}_n \operatorname{Hom}_R(R/I^n,J)
$$
where $J$ is a K-injective replacement for $M$. The cohomology of 
this is often called the _local cohomology_ of $M$ with respect to 
the ideal $I$. 

From the proposition, there is a 
semi-orthogonal decomposition 
$$
    D(R) = \langle D_I(R)^{\perp}, D_I(R) \rangle 
$$

The objects of $D_I(R)^{\perp}$ are often _$I$-local_ or 
_torsion-free_. There is an equivalence 
$$
    j^\ast : D_I(R)^{\perp} \to D(U)
$$
where $U$ is the quasi-affine scheme 
$$
    U = \operatorname{Spec} R \setminus V(I)
$$
and given by $j : U \to \operatorname{Spec} R$. 

In general, $U$ is not going to be affine. But, here is a special 
case. Take $R = k[x]$ and $I = (x)$. Then, 
$$
    D_{(x)}(k[x])^{\perp} \cong D(k[x,x^{-1}])
$$
and the map 
$$
    k[x] \to k[x,x^{-1}]
$$
in the inclusion. 

Given an admissible $\mathcal A \subseteq \mathcal T$, we 
get two SODs 
$$
    \mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A, {}^{\perp} \mathcal A \rangle 
$$
and 
$$
    \mathcal T = \langle \mathcal A^{\perp}, \mathcal A \rangle
$$
and we can compare ${}^{\perp} \mathcal A$ and $\mathcal A^{\perp}$ 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        L_{\mathcal A}: {}^{\perp} \mathcal A & \to \mathcal A^{\perp} \\
        B & \mapsto \rho_{\mathcal A^{\perp} } \imath_{ {}^{\perp} \mathcal A} B
    \end{aligned}
$$
and 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        R_{\mathcal A}: \mathcal A^{\perp} & \to {}^{\perp} \mathcal A \\
        B & \mapsto \lambda_{ {}^{\perp} \mathcal A } \imath_{ \mathcal A^{\perp} } B
    \end{aligned}
$$
The functor $L_{\mathcal A}$ is called _left mutation_ and $R_{\mathcal A}$ is _right 
mutation_. 

**Lemma**. $L_{\mathcal A}$ and $R_{\mathcal A}$ are inverse. 

{% proof %}
Let $B \in {}^\perp \mathcal A$. To mutate it into $\mathcal A^\perp$, we fit it into a 
triangle 
$$
    A \to B \to B^\prime \to A_B[1]
$$
To mutate it back we fit $B^\prime$ into a triangle of the form 
$$
    B^{\prime \prime} \to B^\prime A^\prime \to B^{\prime \prime}[1]
$$
We notice that shifting the previous triangle gives 
$$
    B \to B^\prime \to A_B[1] \to B[1]
$$
one such. Thus, 
$$
    R_{\mathcal A} L_{\mathcal A} \cong \operatorname{Id}
$$
Similarly, 
$$
    L_{\mathcal A} R_{\mathcal A} \cong \operatorname{Id}
$$
{% endproof %}

While the left and right orthogonals to an admissible $\mathcal A$ are 
equivalent, the actual subcategories in $\mathcal T$ can appear quite 
different. 