---
layout: page
title: 2021-08-26  
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Definition of functors

A functor $F: \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ is a 
- function $F : \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C \to \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal D$ on objects and 
- for each $X, Y \in \mathcal C$ a function 
$$
    F_{X,Y} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,FY)
$$

which we will often also just write as $F$ using the context to disambiguiate. 

These are required to satisfy 
$$
    F( f \circ g ) = F(f) \circ F(g) 
$$
for any pair of morphisms $f,g$ and 
$$
    F(1_X) = 1_{FX}
$$

## Examples
 
- For any category $\mathcal C$, there is the identity function $\operatorname{Id} : \mathcal C \to \mathcal C$ 
which is the identity functor on objects and morphisms.
- Given a homomorphism $f : R \to S$ of rings, there is a _pushforward_ (or _restriction of scalars_) functor 
$$
    f_\ast : \operatorname{Mod} S \to \operatorname{Mod} R 
$$
which on the underlying abelian group is $f_\ast N := N$ with the $R$-action given by 
$$
    r \cdot n := f(r) n. 
$$
For a morphism of $\phi : N \to N^\prime$ in $\operatorname{Mod} S$, we set 
$$
    f_\ast \phi := \phi
$$
Let's quickly see that we have a module homomorphism 
$$
    f_\ast \phi( r \cdot n ) = \phi(f(r) n) = f(r) \phi(n) = r \cdot f_\ast \phi(n)
$$
where we can extract $f(r)$ since $\phi$ is assumed to be a $S$-module homomorphism. 

    Thus $f_\ast$ is well-defined and it is immediate that it preserves composition and identity maps. 

- Another important functor starts from a $R$-$S$ bimodule $P$. I claim that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-) : \operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Mod} S 
$$
is a well-defined functor. 

    First we need to give the set $\operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-)$ the structure a $S$-module. As an 
    abelian group, we set 
    $$
        (f+g)(p) := f(p) + f(p)
    $$  
    and for the $S$-module structure we let 
    $$
        s \cdot f(p) := f(ps).
    $$
    
    For morphisms, we take 
    $$
        \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,f)(\phi) := f \circ \phi. 
    $$

As the Hom-functor $\operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-)$ will be quite central to our investigation, let's work through 
a couple sub-examples. 

- Take $R = S = P$. This bimodule is usually called the _diagonal_ of $R$ and denoted by $\Delta_R$. We already 
saw that evaluation at $1$ is a bijection 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(\Delta,M) \overset{ev_1}{\to} M \\
    \phi \mapsto \phi(1) 
$$
for any $R$-module $M$. This is in fact an isomorphism of $R$-modules since 
$$
    (r \cdot \phi)(1) = \phi(r) = r \phi(1). 
$$
Thus, for each $M$, application of $\operatorname{Hom}_R(\Delta, M)$ is "naturally" isomorphic to $M$. We will 
make this precise in a moment. 

- Take $R = S = k[x]$ and $P = k[y,z]$ with the bimodule structure given by $x \mapsto y$ and $x \mapsto z$. To 
compute $\operatorname{Hom}_{k[x]}(k[y,z],-)$ we will write a presentation for $k[y,z]$ as a $k[x]$-module. 

    As $k[x]$-module, $k[y,z]$ has a infinite basis given by $z^i$ for $0 \leq i < \infty$. Since it is a free 
    module, 
    $$
        \operatorname{Hom}_{k[x]}(k[y,z],-) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_k(k[z],-).
    $$
    We can specify the $k[x]$-module homomorphism by providing a $k$-linear map from $k[z]$. Let's specialize to 
    $M = k[x]/(x) = k$. Then any linear map $k[z] \to k$ can be written as an infinite sum 
    $$
        \sum_{i = 0}^\infty a_j \delta_j 
    $$
    where 
    $$
        \delta_j (z^i) =
        \begin{cases}
            1 & j = i \\
            0 & \text{ else }
        \end{cases}
    $$
    The $k[x]$ module structure is given by $x \delta\_i = \delta\_{i-1}$ for $i > 0$ and $x \delta_0 = 0$. 

## Natural transformations

Given two functors $F,G : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$, a _natural transformation_ $\nu : F \to G$ is a collection 
of morphisms 
$$
    \nu_X : FX \to GX
$$
for each object $X \in \mathcal C$. For any $f: X \to Y$ in $\mathcal C$, we require the diagram 
<center>
{% tikz nat_trans_diagram %}
    \node at (0,0) (FX) {$FX$};
    \node at (2,0) (FY) {$FY$};
    \node at (0,-2) (GX) {$GX$};
    \node at (2,-2) (GY) {$GY$};
    \draw[->] (FX) -- node[above] {$F(f)$} (FY);
    \draw[->] (FX) -- node[left] {$\nu_X$} (GX);
    \draw[->] (GX) -- node[below] {$G(f)$} (GY);
    \draw[->] (FY) -- node[right] {$\nu_Y$} (GY);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
commutes. 

## Examples

- If $F = G$, then we can take $\nu_X = 1_{FX}$. This is the identity natural transformation. 
- If $F = G = \operatorname{Id}$, then saying that $\nu: F \to G$ is a natural transformation is 
requiring that 
<center>
{% tikz nat_trans_center %}
    \node at (0,0) (X1) {$X$};
    \node at (2,0) (Y1) {$Y$};
    \node at (0,-2) (X2) {$X$};
    \node at (2,-2) (Y2) {$Y$};
    \draw[->] (X1) -- node[above] {$f$} (Y1);
    \draw[->] (X1) -- node[left] {$\nu_X$} (X2);
    \draw[->] (X2) -- node[below] {$f$} (Y2);
    \draw[->] (Y1) -- node[right] {$\nu_Y$} (Y2);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
is requiring that $\nu_X \circ f = f \circ \nu_Y$ for any morphism $f: X \to Y$. In particular, if 
$f : X \to X$, then $\nu_X$ must be in the center of $\operatorname{End}(X)$. 
- We have the free abelian group functor 
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^\bullet : \operatorname{Set} \to \operatorname{Ab}
$$
and the forgetful functor 
$$
    \operatorname{forget}: \operatorname{Ab} \to \operatorname{Set} \\
    A \mapsto A.
$$
There is a natural transformation 
$$
    \operatorname{Id} \to \operatorname{forget}(\mathbb{Z}^\bullet)
$$
given by 
$$
    \nu_U : U \to \mathbb{Z}^U \\
    u \mapsto e_u
$$
Indeed, since
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^f\left(\sum a_u e_u\right) := \sum a_u e_{f(u)}
$$
we see that for $f: U \to V$ 
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^f \circ \nu_U = e_{f(u)} = \nu_V \circ f.
$$
- Given an $R$-$S$ bimodule morphism $\psi : P \to Q$, we have a natural transformation 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(Q,-) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-) \\
    \phi \mapsto \phi \circ \psi 
$$

## Functor categories

Using natural transformations, we can put functors into a category. (Remember the 
[Caution]({% link notes/2021_08_24.md %}#Caution)). The objects of 
$\operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C, \mathcal D)$ are functors $F : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ 
while 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C, \mathcal D)}(F,G) := 
    \lbrace \nu : F \to G \mid \nu \text{ a natural transformation } \rbrace
$$
Composition of natural transformation is given object-wise
$$
    (\nu \circ \mu)_X = \nu_X \circ \mu_X
$$
and the identity is the identity natural transformation. 

Each object of $\mathcal C$ gives two functors. 
$$
    h_X : \mathcal C \to \operatorname{Set} \\
    Y \mapsto \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y)
$$
and 
$$
    h^X : \mathcal C^{op} \to \operatorname{Set} \\
    Y \mapsto \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(Y,X)
$$

A map $f : X \to X^\prime$ gives a natural transformation 
$$
    f_Y : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X^\prime,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \\
    \phi \mapsto \phi \circ f. 
$$
and similarly $f_Y : h^X \to h^{X^\prime}$. 

Taking everything together, we have two functors
$$
    h_\bullet : \mathcal C^{op} \to \operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C, \operatorname{Set})
$$
and 
$$
    h^\bullet : \mathcal C \to  \operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C^{op}, \operatorname{Set}).
$$

## Faithful, full, essentially surjective, equivalences


- A functor $F$ is _faithful_ if it is injective on morphism sets 
$$
    F(f) = F(g) \Rightarrow f = g
$$
- $F$ is _full_ if it surjective on morphism sets
$$
    g = F(f) 
$$
for some $f$. 

One can of course make the analogous definition on the level of objects but it turns out 
that having a natural flexibility is useful in practice. 

Two objects $X,Y \in \mathcal C$ are _isomorphic_ if there exists morphisms 
$ f : X \to Y $ and $ g : Y \to X$ such that $gf = 1_X$ and $fg = 1_Y$. 

Since being isomorphic is an equivalence relation, we form the quotient 
$\operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C/ \sim_{iso}$ by it.

A functor $F$ is _essentially surjective_ if the induced map 
$$
    F : \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C \to \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal D/ \sim_{iso}
$$
is surjective. In other words, every object of $\mathcal D$ is isomorphic to an object 
in the image of $F$. 

A functor $F : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ is an _equivalence_ there is a 
functor $G : \mathcal D \to \mathcal C$ and natural isomorphisms 
$$
    F \circ G \cong \operatorname{Id}_{\mathcal D} \\
    G \circ F \cong \operatorname{Id}_{\mathcal C}
$$
We will often call $G$ the _inverse_ functor and denote it by $F^{-1}$. Note this is misleading. 
In general, $F^{-1}$ is only determined up to natural isomorphism. 

All these definitions are tied closely together by the following fundamental result. 

**Theorem**. $F$ is an equivalence if and only if it is full, faithful, and essentially surjective. 

**Proof**. Let's first assume that $F$ is an equivalence. Let $\nu : F^{-1} F \to \operatorname{Id}$ 
denote the natural isomorphism. We have the following diagram
<center>
{% tikz equiv_full_faithful %}
    \node at (0,0) (start) {$\operatorname{Hom}(X,Y)$};
    \node at (4,0) (F) {$\operatorname{Hom}(FX,FY)$};
    \node at (4,-2) (G) {$\operatorname{Hom}(F^{-1}FX,F^{-1}FY)$};
    \node at (0,-2) (end) {$\operatorname{Hom}(X,Y)$};
    \draw[->] (start) -- node[above] {$F$} (F);
    \draw[->] (F) -- node[right] {$F^{-1}$} (G);
    \draw[->] (G) -- node[below] {$\nu_Y \circ - \circ \nu^{-1}_X$} (end);
    \draw[->] (start) -- node[left] {$\varphi$} (end);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
and we want to check that $\varphi$ is actually the identity function. Note that, since $\nu_X$ and $\nu_Y$ are 
isomorphisms themselves, the conjugation $\nu_Y \circ - \circ \nu_X^{-1}$ is a bijection. Since $\nu$ is 
natural transformation, we know that 
<center>
{% tikz nu_F_Finv %}
    \node at (0,0) (FFX) {$F^{-1}FX$};
    \node at (2,0) (FFY) {$F^{-1}FY$};
    \node at (2,-2) (Y) {$Y$};
    \node at (0,-2) (X) {$X$};
    \draw[->] (FFX) -- node[above] {$F^{-1}F(f)$} (FFY);
    \draw[->] (FFY) -- node[right] {$\nu_Y$} (Y);
    \draw[->] (X) -- node[below] {$f$} (Y);
    \draw[->] (FFX) -- node[left] {$\nu_X$} (X);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
commutes. Thus,
$$
    \varphi(f) = \nu_Y \circ F^{-1}F(f) \circ \nu^{-1}_X = f
$$
So $F$ is injective and $F^{-1}$ is surjective. Reversing the roles of $F$ and $F^{-1}$, we see that both 
are bijective. 

Since $X \cong FF^{-1}X$, $X$ is isomorphic to $F$ applied to $F^{-1}X$. Hence, $F$ is essentially surjective. 

Now assume that $F$ is full, faithful, and essentially surjective. For each $Y \in \mathcal D$, pick some 
$X \in \mathcal C$ and isomorphism $\phi_Y : FX \to Y$. 

Define $G : \mathcal D \to \mathcal C$ by 
$$
    GY := X
$$
and 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(Y,Y^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,X^\prime) \\
    \psi \mapsto F_{X,X^\prime}^{-1} \left( \phi_{Y^\prime} \circ \psi \circ \phi_Y^{-1} \right)
$$
We leave it as an exercise to check that $G$ is 
- well-defined and
- an inverse to $F$. 
