---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-09
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Brown Representability 

Existence of semi-orthogonal decompositions and if Serre functors 
strongly depending on representability of functors. It is useful to 
have strong general criteria for such. 

Here we will review a criteria for "large" categories: compactly 
generated triangulated categories. [Next]({% link notes/2021_11_11.md %}) 
we will cover one for "small" categories, often categories of 
compact objects in compactly generated triangulated categories. 

Recall that a functor $H: \mathcal T^{op} \to \operatorname{Ab}$ is 
_cohomological_ if for any triangle 
$$
    X \to Y \to Z \to X[1]
$$
the resulting sequence 
$$
    \cdots \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(X,W) \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(Y,W) 
    \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(Z,W) \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(X[1],W) 
    \rightarrow \cdots 
$$
is exact. 

We say that $H$ _takes coproducts to products_ if the natural map
$$
    H\left(\bigoplus X_a \right) \to \prod H(X_a) 
$$
is an isomorphism for any coproduct. 

**Theorem**. (Brown Representability) Let $\mathcal T$ be a compactly 
generated triangulated category and $H : \mathcal T^{op} \to \operatorname{Ab}$ 
a functor. Then $H$ is representable if and only if $H$ is cohomological and 
takes coproducts to products. 

{% proof %}
We have seen that representable functors must take triangles to long exact 
sequences and coproducts to products. So assume that $H$ is a cohomological 
functor which takes coproducts to products and let $\mathcal C$ be a 
set of compact generators. 

Set 
$$
	U_0 := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} H(C)
$$
so each element is a pair $(C,u)$ with $C \in \mathcal C$ and $u \in H(C)$. 
Set 
$$
	X_0 := \bigoplus_{(C,u) \in U_0} C
$$
If we apply $H$ to $X_0$, we get 
$$
	H(X_0) = \prod_{U_0} H(C)
$$
We have the distinguished element $\xi_0 \in H(X_0)$ given by $u \in H(C)$ 
for the factor $(C,u)$. From Yoneda, we get a natural transformation 
$$
	\xi_0 : h^{X_0} \to H
$$

Now assume we have constructed $X_n$ and $\xi_n : h^{X_n} \to H$. We set 
$$
	U_n := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} \operatorname{ker} 
	\left(\xi_n(C) : \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_n) \to H(C) \right)
$$
and set 
$$
	Y_n := \bigcup_{U_n} C
$$
Since each element of $U_n$ is a map $C \to X_n$, we get a map $Y_n \to X_n$. 
We let 
$$
	X_{n+1} := \operatorname{cone}(Y_n \to X_n) 
$$

We want to show that $\xi_n : h^{X_n} \to H$ comes via composition from some 
$\xi_{n+1} : h^{X_{n+1}} \to H$. If we apply $H$ to the triangle, we get 
$$
	\cdots \leftarrow H(Y_n) \leftarrow H(X_n) \leftarrow 
	H(X_{n+1}) \leftarrow \cdots 
$$
an exact sequence. 

The map 
$$
	H(X_n) \to H(Y_n) = \prod_{U_n} H(C) 
$$
takes $\xi_n$ to the element $\prod_{(C,u)} \xi_n(C)(u) = 0$. Thus, there is 
some $\xi_{n+1} \in H(X_{n+1})$ with $H(f_{n+1})(\xi_{n+1}) = \xi_n$ for 
$f_{n+1} : X_n \to X_{n+1}$. This is equivalent to 
{% eqn x_n-commutative %}
\begin{tikzcd}
h^{X_n} \ar[dd,"h^{f_{n+1}}"] \ar[dr,"\xi_n"] & \\
& H \\
h^{X_{n+1}} \ar[ru,"\xi_{n+1}"] &  
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commuting. 

Now we let $X = \operatorname{hocolim} X_n$. We check that we have a natural 
transformation $h^X \to H$ induced from the $\xi_n$. We have triangle 
$$
	\bigoplus X_n \to \bigoplus X_n \to \operatorname{hocolim} X_n 
	\to \bigoplus X_n [1]
$$
We apply $H$ to get an exact sequence
$$
\prod H(X_n) \leftarrow \prod H(X_n) \leftarrow H(\operatorname{hocolim} 
X_n) 
$$
So we need to check that $\prod \xi_n$ lie in the kernel. Recall the map 
$1-f: \bigoplus X_n \to \bigoplus X_n$ when restricted to the factor 
$X_n$ is 
$$
X_n \overset{\operatorname{id}_{X_n},-f_{n+1}}{\to} X_n \oplus X_{n+1}
$$
Applying $H$ we have 
$$
H(1-f)\left(\prod \xi_n \right) = \prod (\xi_n - H(f_n)(\xi_{n-1}))
$$
We saw that $\xi_n = H(f_n)(\xi_{n-1})$ so the image is $0$. Thus, 
we have some $\xi \in H(\operatorname{hocolim} X_n)$ giving us the 
desired $\xi : h^X \to H$. 

Let $\mathcal S$ be the full subcategory of objects $Y$ of 
$\mathcal T$ for which
$$
\xi(Y) : \operatorname{Hom}(Y,X) \to H(Y)
$$
is an isomorphism. Since both $h^X$ and $H$ take triangles to long 
exact sequences, we see that $\mathcal S$ is triangulated. 

Since both takes coproducts to products, we see $\mathcal S$ is 
closed under coproducts.

Finally, take $C \in \mathcal C$. Then, $\xi(C)$ is surjective as 
$\xi_0(C)$ is surjective by construction. If $g : C \to X_n$ 
has $\xi(C)(g) = 0$. Then $g \in U_n$ by construction so we have a 
lift 
{% eqn lift %}
\begin{tikzcd}
Y_n \ar[r] & X_n \ar[r] & X_{n+1} \\
& C \ar[lu,dashed] \ar[u,"g"] &
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
Consequently $f_{n+1}g = 0$. Thus, $g: C \to X$ is the zero map. We can 
conclude that $C \in \mathcal S$. From [previously]
(% link notes/2021_10_05.md %) we see that $\mathcal T = \mathcal S$ 
and $X$ represents $H$. 
{% endproof %}

An immediate consequence of Brown Representability is a condition 
on existence of a right adjoint. 

**Corollary**. Let $F: \mathcal T \to \mathcal S$ be an exact 
functor between triangulated categories. If $\mathcal T$ is 
compactly generated and $F$ commutes with coproducts, ie the 
natural map
$$
\bigoplus F(X_a) \to F\left(\bigoplus X_a \right)
$$
is an isomorphism for coproducts, then $F$ has a right adjoint. 

{% proof %}
To construct the right adjoint is equivalent to representing the 
functor 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal S}(F(-),Y) : \mathcal T^{op} \to 
\operatorname{Ab}
$$
But, this functor is cohomological since $F$ is exact and 
representable functors are cohomology. It also takes coproducts 
to products. Thus, the previous result shows it is representable. 
{% endproof %}
