---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-07
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Abelian categories and Mod R

Let record some pleasant features of $\operatorname{Mod} R$ and their abstractions. 

## Enriched in Ab 

First, each morphism space $\operatorname{Hom}_{R}(M,N)$ is an abelian group under 
pointwise addition of functions 
$$
    (f+g)(m) := f(m) + g(m) 
$$

Composition is bilinear over the abelian group struture: 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        (f_1+f_2) \circ g & = f_1 \circ g + f_2 \circ g \\
        f \circ (g_1 + g_2) & = f \circ g_1 + f \circ g_2 
    \end{aligned}
$$

**Definition**. We say $\mathcal C$ is _enriched in Ab_ if $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y)$ 
has the structure of abelian group such composition in $\mathcal C$ is bilinear over the 
group structure. 

## Additive categories 

Next, in $\operatorname{Mod} R$, finite products and coproducts (including over $\empty$) 
both exist and the natural map 
$$
    \bigsqcup_{i=1}^t M_i \to \prod_{i=1}^t M_i 
$$
is an isomorphism. Both are the direct sum $\bigoplus M_i$. 

If we are in a category where this condition on finite coproducts/products is satsified we will 
use direct sum notation for the coproducts. 

**Definition**. We say that $\mathcal C$ is an _additive category_ if it is enriched in Ab and 
finite coproducts and products exist and coincide. 

A functor $F : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ is _additive_ if each 
$$
    F_{X,Y} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,FY)
$$
is a group homomorphism and the natural map 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \bigoplus_{i=1}^t F X_i \to F \left(\ \bigoplus_{i=1}^t X_i \right)  
    \end{aligned}
$$
is an isomorphism.

All of $- \otimes_R M$, $\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,-)$, and $\operatorname{Hom}_R(-,M)$ are examples of additive 
functors. Indeed, for the last two, we are just expressing the universal properties of products and coproducts. 

For tensor product, the natural map 
$$
    \bigoplus_{i \in I} \left(N_i \otimes_R M\right) \to \left( \bigoplus_{i \in I} N_i \right) \otimes_R M 
$$
is an isomorphism. So, in particular, $-\otimes_R M$ commutes with finite coproducts. 

## Kernels and cokernels 

Each morphism $\phi : M \to N$ in $\operatorname{Mod} R$ admits a kernel and cokernel. To characterize them via 
universal property, let us remember the following definitions.

**Definition**. Let $\delta_i : A_i \to A_{i+1}$ be a collection of morphisms of abelian groups for $- N < i < M$ 
(with the possibility that $N = \infty$ or $M = \infty$). 

We say that $(A_\bullet, \delta_\bullet)$ is a _complex_ if
$$
    \operatorname{im} \delta_i \subseteq \ker \delta_{i+1}
$$

The collection is _exact_ if 
$$
    \operatorname{im} \delta_i = \ker \delta_{i+1}
$$

In general, we can measure the failure of cohomology using the _cohomology groups_ of $(A_\bullet,\delta_\bullet)$:
$$
    H^i(A_\bullet,\delta_\bullet) := \frac{\ker \delta_i}{\operatorname{im} \delta_{i-1}}
$$

These definition are given for the moment in Ab but we will how to make sense of them in an arbitrary abelian category 
momentarily. 

With this, we note that $\ker \phi$, for $\phi: M \to N$ of $R$-modules, fits into the exact sequence of abelian groups:
$$
    0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime, \ker \phi) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime,M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime,N)
$$

Similarly, for the cokernel $\operatorname{cok} \phi$, we get an exact sequence 
$$
    0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(\operatorname{cok} \phi, M^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(N,M^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M,M^\prime)
$$

Each of these is characterizations is equivalent to a universal lifting/extension property. 

For the kernel, we have the diagram 
<center>
{% tikz kernel_lifting %}
    \node (T) at (0,0) {$M^\prime$};
    \node (M) at (0,-2) {$M$};
    \node (N) at (2,-2) {$N$};
    \node (ker) at (-2,-2) {$\ker \phi$};
    \draw[->] (T) -- node[left] {$\psi$} (M);
    \draw[->] (T) -- node[above right] {$0$} (N);
    \draw[->,dashed] (T) -- node[above left] {$\exists ! ~\tilde{\psi}$} (ker);
    \draw[->] (ker) -- (M);
    \draw[->] (M) -- (N);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
which expresses that we get a unique $\tilde{\psi}$ if and only if the composition $M^\prime \to M \to N$ is $0$. 
In other words, we can lift map $\phi : M^\prime \to M$ uniquely over $\ker \phi \to M$ if and only if $\phi \circ \psi = 0$. 

For the cokernel we have the dual lifting problem 
<center>
{% tikz cokernel_lifting %}
    \node (T) at (0,-2) {$M^\prime$};
    \node (M) at (-2,0) {$M$};
    \node (N) at (0,0) {$N$};
    \node (coker) at (2,0) {$\operatorname{coker} \phi$};
    \draw[->] (N) -- node[left] {$\psi$} (T);
    \draw[->] (M) -- node[below left] {$0$} (T);
    \draw[->,dashed] (coker) -- node[below right] {$\exists ! ~\tilde{\psi}$} (T);
    \draw[->] (N) -- (coker);
    \draw[->] (M) -- (N);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
which expresses that we get a unique $\tilde{\psi}$ if and if $M \to N \to M^\prime$ is $0$. 

In a general additive category $\mathcal A$, given $\phi : X \to Y$ we ask about representability of the functors 
$$
    T \mapsto \ker\left( \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(T,X) \overset{\phi \circ -}{\to} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(T,Y)\right)
$$
and 
$$
    T \mapsto \ker\left( \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(Y,T) \overset{- \circ \phi}{\to} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(X,T)\right)
$$

If the first is representable, we call it the kernel $\ker \phi$. Note that there is natural transformation 
$$
    \ker\left( \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(-,X) \overset{\phi \circ -}{\to} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(-,Y)\right) 
    \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(-,X)
$$
given by forgeting that the map lies in the kernel. Thus we have a unique map $\alpha : \ker \phi \to X$ if the kernel exists. 

For the second, we call the representing object the cokernel and write it as $\operatorname{coker} \phi$. It comes with a natural 
map $\beta: Y \to \operatorname{coker} \phi$. 

Existence of kernels and cokernels is almost enough for the definition of an abelian category. There is one more condition that holds 
in $\operatorname{Mod} R$. For a morphism of modules $\phi: M \to N$, the natural map 
$$
    \operatorname{coker} \alpha \to \operatorname{ker} \beta
$$
is an isomorphism. The first object is often called the _coimage_ while the second is called the _image_ of $\phi$. 

In this case, both are isomorphic to the image $\phi(M)$ submodule of $N$. In general, this is not assured. 

**Definition**. An _abelian category_ is an additive category $\mathcal A$ possessing all kernels and cokernels with the natural maps 
$$
    \operatorname{coker} \alpha \to \operatorname{ker} \beta
$$
beings isomorphisms. Since the coimage and image coincide, we will just write this as $\operatorname{im} \phi$. 

Given this, we can talk about _sub-objects_ and _quotient-objects_. A morphism $\phi: X \to Y$ exhibits $Y$ as a sub-object of $Y$ if 
$\ker \phi \cong 0$. Similarly, $Y$ is a quotient object if $\operatorname{coker} \phi \cong 0$. We will just write $X \subseteq Y$ for 
a sub-object and $Y = X/Z$ for a quotient object. (Here $Z = \ker \phi$). 

We can now lift our definitions of complexes, exactness, and cohomology to an abelian category $\mathcal A$ without altering any notation. 

Some more notation: if $0 \to A \to B$ is exact, we will write $A \hookrightarrow B$. If $A \to B \to 0$ is exact, we write 
$A \twoheadrightarrow B$. 

## Exactness 

We don't call functors respecting the abelian category structures abelian. 

**Definition**. Let $F : \mathcal A \to \mathcal B$ be an additive functor between abelian categories. We say that $F$ is _left-exact_ if 
the natural map 
$$
    F( \ker \phi ) \to \ker F(\phi)
$$
is an isomorphism for any $\phi : X \to Y$ in $\mathcal A$. We say that $F$ is _right-exact_ if the natural map 
$$
    \operatorname{coker} F(\phi) \to F(\operatorname{coker} \phi)
$$
is an isomorphism for any $\phi$. If $F$ is both left and right exact, we simply call it _exact_. 

Left-exactness can be expressed in terms of preservation of exact sequences of a particular shape. A functor $F$ is left-exact if and only if 
whenever we have an exact sequence 
$$
    0 \to A \to B \to C 
$$
the application of $F$ yields an exact sequence 
$$
    0 \to FA \to FB \to FC
$$

Similarly, $F$ is right exact if and only if for any exact sequence of the form 
$$
    A \to B \to C \to 0
$$ 
the sequence is 
$$
    FA \to FB \to FC \to 0
$$
is also exact. 

Each of these results reduces, after to tracing out the definitions, to the fact that $0 \to A \to B \to C$ is exact is equivalent to saying 
that $A$ is the kernel of $B \to C$ and the analogously stated fact for cokernels. 

Exactness can also be expressed in this way. $F$ is exact if and only if for any exact sequence 
$$
    0 \to A \to B \to C \to 0
$$
the sequence 
$$
    0 \to FA \to FB \to FC \to 0 
$$
is also exact. 

Exact sequences of the shape $0 \to A \to B \to C \to 0$ pop up frequently so they are given a name: a _short exact sequence_. By convention, 
a longer exact sequence is often termed _long_. 

### Examples 

- Of course the identity functor is exact. 

- The forgetful functor $\operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Ab}$ is exact. 

- If $F$ is a free $R$-module, then $- \otimes_R$ is exact. Indeed, $F \cong R^{\oplus X}$ for some set $X$ and we have a natural isomorphism 
$$
    N \otimes_R R^{\oplus X} \cong N^{\oplus X}
$$
The result follows from the more general fact that coproducts of exact sequences remain exact. 

- Similarly, if $F$ is a free module, then there is a natural isomorphism 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(R^{\oplus X}, N) \cong \prod_X N
$$
Products of exact sequences remain exact in $\operatorname{Mod} R$ so $\operatorname{Hom}_R(F,-)$ is also exact. 

We will see next that Hom and tensor are not exact in general. They are each "half-exact". 

### Adjoints and exactness

Given an adjunction $F \vdash G$ of Ab-enriched functors between abelian categories, we get a some exactness for free. 

First, since $F$ commutes with coproducts and $G$ commutes with products, we automatically know that $F$ and $G$ are 
additive. 

Next we can run the same argument that established that commutativity to get commutativity for kernels and cokernels. 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \ker \operatorname{Hom}(X,G(\phi)) & \cong \ker \operatorname{Hom}(F(X),\phi) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}(F(X),\ker \phi) \\
        & \cong \operatorname{Hom}(X,G(\ker \phi))
    \end{aligned}
$$
So $G$ commutes with kernels, ie is left exact. Similarly, $F$ is right exact. 

## Freyd-Mitchell embedding 

It seems possible that a general abelian category could be far from our touchstone of $\operatorname{Mod} R$. The Freyd-Mitchell Embedding 
Theorem says this not the case.

**Theorem**. Let $\mathcal A$ be a small abelian category. Then there exists a not-necessarily unital ring $R$ and a fully-faithful exact 
functor 
$$
    \mathcal A \to \operatorname{Mod} R.
$$

We will not provide a proof. See [this MO post](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/47747/freyd-mitchells-embedding-theorem) for a nice 
dicussion of the proof. 

The result becomes more immediate in examples where you already have a set of projective generators or injective co-generators in 
your hand. The hard work in the theorem is cook up an injective co-generator in a bigger category. 

The main utility of Freyd-Mitchell is that 
- we feel good that $\mathcal A$ is not so far from $\operatorname{Mod} R$ and 
- each $\mathcal A$ admits a faithful functor to $\operatorname{Set}$ so we can reason using
elements of each object $A$ of $\mathcal A$. 

This semester our main abelian category is $\operatorname{Mod} R$. While results may be stated more generally, details will usually only 
be given for justifications involving this example. (Next semester is a globalization of this: $\operatorname{Qcoh} X$.)