---
layout: page
title: 2021-10-12
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Derived Morita equivalence

**Definition**. We say that two rings $R$ and $S$ are _derived 
Morita equivalent_ if $D(R) \cong D(S)$. 

The next goal will be to prove the following theorem of Rickard. 

**Theorem**. If $R$ and $S$ are derived Morita equivalent, then 
there exists a $U \in D(R \otimes_{\mathbb{Z}} S)$ such that 
$$
    - \overset{\mathbf{L}}{\otimes}_R U : D(R) \to D(S)
$$
is an equivalence. 

As a corollary of this, we know that 
$$
    \mathbf{R}\operatorname{Hom}_S(U,-) : D(S) \to D(R) 
$$
is also an equivalence. 

We start slowly.

**Lemma**. Assume that $R$ and $S$ are derived Morita 
equivalent. Then there exists a perfect complex of $S$-
modules $P$ with 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(S)}(P,P) \cong R, \\
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(S)}(P,P[i]) = 0 \text{ for } i \neq 0,
$$
and 
$$
    \overline{\langle P \rangle} = \operatorname{perf} S
$$

{% proof %}
Given an equivalence $F: D(R) \to D(S)$ we set $P := F(R)$. Then
$$
    F: \operatorname{Hom}_{D(R)}(R,R[i]) \overset{\sim}{\to} 
    \operatorname{Hom}_{D(S)}(P,P[i])
$$
is an isomorphism. 

Also, $P$ generates as $\operatorname{perf} S$ as $R$ 
generates $\operatorname{perf} S$. 
{% endproof %}

**Definition**. An object $P$ in a triangulated category $\mathcal T$ 
is called a _generator_ if 
$$
    \overline{\langle P \rangle} = \mathcal T
$$
If $\mathcal S$ is compactly generated and 
$$
    \overline{\langle P \rangle} = \mathcal S^c
$$
we say $P$ is a _compact generator_. 

$P$ is called _tilting_ if 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(P,P[i]) = 0 \text{ for } i \neq 0
$$

For a nice enough compactly generated triangulated, a compact 
generator captures everything. In particular, for derived 
categories of abelian categories. 

But to precisely state how this works we need to take a digression 
into differential graded algebras and modules over them.

## DG-algebras, DG-modules, and derived categories

**Definition**. Let $k$ be a commutative ring. A _differential graded 
algebra_ or _dg-algebra_ or _DGA_ is $k$-algebra $A$ with a 
decomposition as $k$-modules
$$
    A = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z} } A^i
$$
and $k$-linear maps 
$$
    \delta^i : A^i \to A^{i+1}
$$
such that 
- multiplication is of degree $0$ 
$$
    A^i \cdot A^j \subseteq A^{i+j}
$$
- $\delta$ is a $k$-linear differential: 
$\delta^0(1) = 0$ and $\delta^{i+1} \delta^i = 0$ for all $i$
- $\delta$ satisfies the graded Liebniz rule for multiplication in $A$ 
$$
    \delta(aa^\prime) = \delta(a)a^\prime + (-1)^{|a|} a \delta(a^\prime)
$$
where $a$ and $a^\prime$ are homogeneous of degrees $|a|$ and $|a^\prime|$. 

A _morphism_ $f: A \to B$ of dg-algebras is a $k$-algebra morphism with 
$$
	f(A^i) \subseteq B^i
$$
and 
$$
	\delta_B \circ f - f \circ \delta_A = 0
$$

A _dg-module_ $M$ over a dg-algebra $A$ is an $A$-module with a $k$-module 
decomposition
$$
    M = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z} } M^i
$$
and differential 
$$
    \delta^i : M^i \to M^{i+1} 
$$
such that 
- 
$$
    A^i \cdot M^j \subseteq M^{i+j}
$$
- 
$$
    \delta_M(a \cdot m) = \delta_A(a) \cdot m + (-1)^{|a|} a \cdot \delta_M(m) 
$$

A _morphism_ $\phi : M \to N$ of dg-modules over a dg-algebra $A$ is an 
$A$-module homomorphism with 
$$
	\phi(M^i) \subseteq N^i
$$
and 
$$
	\delta_N \circ \phi - \phi \circ \delta_M = 0 
$$
Note that any $\phi$ induces a homomorphism of cohomology groups 
$$
	H^i(\phi) : H^i(M) \to H^i(N) 
$$
so we can speak of quasi-isomorphisms. 

We have an additive category $\operatorname{Mod} A$ of (left) dg-modules 
over a dg-algebra $A$. Inside there lies the full subcategory 
$\operatorname{Acyclic} A$ of dg-modules with 
$$
    H^\ast(M) = 0
$$

The _derived category_ $D(A)$ is the localization of $\operatorname{Mod} A$ 
at the class of quasi-isomorphisms with the 
[same definition]({% link notes/2021_09_23.md %}) for the derived 
category of an abelian category, replacing $\operatorname{Ch} \mathcal A$ 
with $\operatorname{Mod} A$. 

This is sensible thing to do because of the following lemma.

**Lemma**. If $A$ is a dg-algebra with $A^i = 0$ for $i \neq 0$, then there 
is an isomoprhism
$$
    \operatorname{Ch}(\operatorname{Mod} A^0) \cong \operatorname{Mod} A
$$

{% proof %}
    Any chain complex $(M^i,\delta^i)$ of $A^0$ modules gives a dg-module 
    over $A$ with 
    $$
        M = \bigoplus M^i
    $$
    and $\delta$ being the differential. And vice-versa. 
{% endproof %}

Given two dg-modules $M$ and $N$, we have a chain complex whose degree $i$ term 
is 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}^i(M,N) := \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{gr} A}(M,N[i])
$$
where $\operatorname{gr} A$ is the underlying graded algebra of $A$ , ie just $A$ 
and toss out the differential. Morphisms are taken to be degree $0$. 

The differential on 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}(M,N) = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} \operatorname{Hom}^i(M,N)
$$
is given by 
$$
    \delta \phi := \delta_N \circ \phi - (-1)^{|\phi|} \phi \circ \delta_M 
$$

The groups $H^0(\operatorname{Hom}(M,N))$ give the morphisms in the _homotopy 
category_ of dg-modules over $A$, $K(A)$. 

Following the course of $D(\mathcal A)$, we can also talk about K-projective 
and K-injective dg-modules. 

A dg-module $P$ is K-projective if 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(P,C) = 0
$$
for any $C \in \operatorname{Acyclic} A$. A dg-module $I$ is K-injective if 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(C,I) = 0
$$
for any $C \in \operatorname{Acyclic} A$. 

**Proposition**. Assuming there are enough K-projective dg-modules, then 
$$
    K-Proj(A) \to D(A)
$$
is an equivalence. Similarly, assuming there are enough K-injective 
dg-modules, 
$$
    K-Inj(A) \to D(A)
$$
is an equivalence. 

{% proof %}
The proof is completely analogous to 
[the one]({% link notes/2021_09_23.md %}) for the derived category 
of an abelian category. We suppress it.  
{% endproof %}

We need to determine if we have enough K-projectives and K-injectives. 
We have some obvious K-projective objects. 

**Lemma**. There is a natural isomorphism 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(A,M) \to H^0(M)
$$
for any dg-module $M$. 

{% proof %}
In the category $\operatorname{gr} A$, we have the map 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{gr} A}(A,M) & \to M^0 \\
        \phi & \mapsto \phi(1)
    \end{aligned}
$$
is an isomorphism. For the map $a \mapsto am$ to commute with differential 
we need $\delta_M(m) = 0$. The null-homotopic maps are those coming from 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{gr} A}(A,M[-1]) & \to M^{-1}
$$
after applying $\delta_M$, ie the image of $\delta_M$. Thus, 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(A,M) \to H^0(M)
$$
{% endproof %}

Consequently, we also have 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(A[i],M) \to H^{-i}(M)
$$
Thus all $A[i]$ are K-projective. 

To show we have enough K-projective dg-modules, we need to use 
the triangulated category structure on $K(A)$. It is completely analogous 
to $K(\mathcal A)$. Given a morphism $\phi : M \to N$, we can 
form the cone 
$$
    M[1] \oplus N, \begin{pmatrix} \delta_{M[1]} & \phi \\ 0 & \delta_N 
    \end{pmatrix} 
$$
The triangles for the structure are those isomorphic to 
$$
	M \overset{\phi}{\to} N \to C(\phi) \to M[1]
$$

**Proposition**. This collection of triangles with the shift $[1]$ 
endow $K(A)$ with structure of a triangulated category. 

Since the proof is very similar to that for $K(\mathcal A)$, we 
omit it. We turn to constructing enough K-projectives using a 
method similar to the ["resolution"]({% link notes/2021_10_05.md %}) 
by compact objects in a compactly-generated triangulated 
category. 

Let $M$ be a dg-module over $A$. Let $U_0$ be a generating set for 
the $k$-module $H^\ast(M)$ and choose a lift $\tilde{u} \in M$ for 
each $u \in U_0$. Set
$$
	P_0 := \bigoplus_{u \in U_0} A[-|u|]
$$
This has a natural map 
$$
	\begin{aligned}
		P_0 & \to M \\
		1_{u} & \mapsto \tilde{u}
	\end{aligned}
$$
and we have exact sequence 
$$
	H^\ast(P_0) \to H^\ast(M) \to 0
$$
of graded $k$-modules. Let $N$ be the kernel of the map 
$H^\ast(P_0) \to H^\ast(M)$ and let $U_1$ be a generating set for 
it as a $k$-module and choose a lift $\tilde{u} \in P_0$ for each 
$u \in U_1$ and set 
$$
	Q_1 := \bigoplus_{u \in U_1} A[-|u|]
$$
The map $Q_1 \to P_0 \to M$ induces the zero map on cohomology. 
Since $Q_1$ is a direct sum of shifts of $A$, it is therefore the zero 
map in $K(A)$. Thus, we get an induced map 
$$
	P_1 := C(Q_1 \to P_0) \to M
$$

Now, we proceed inductively to construct $P_i \to M$ and 
we set 
$$
	P := \operatorname{colim} P_i
$$

We need to check that $P$ is 
- K-projective and 
- the map $P \to M$ is a quasi-isomorphism. 

For K-projectivity, we have 
$$
	\operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(\operatorname{colim} P_i , C) = 
	\operatorname{lim} \operatorname{Hom}_{K(A)}(P_i,C) = 0 
$$
For a quasi-isomorphism, one can check that each 
$$
	H^\ast(P_i) \to H^\ast(M) \to 0 
$$
is surjective. If $u \in H^\ast(P_i)$ maps to $0$, in $H^\ast(M)$, 
then by construction its image in $P_{i+1}$ is $0$ and $u$ is $0$ 
in the colimit. 

**Proposition**. For any dg-algebra $A$ and any dg-module $M$, there is 
a K-projective dg-module $P$ and a quasi-isomorphism $P \to M$.

There are enough K-injective dg-modules but we 
[outsource](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/0FT0) the proof. 
